








2012




A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?

    1      Children of the Light—Ephesians 5:5–21
    2      Marriage in Christ—Ephesians 5:21–33
    3      Work and Family—Ephesians 6:1–9
    4      Spiritual Warfare—Ephesians 6:10–13
    5      How to Be Strong—Ephesians 6:14–24

Savior and Teacher—A Study of Matthew

    1      Out of Egypt—Matthew 2:13–23
    2      Into Jerusalem—Matthew 21:1–14
    3      The Last Temptation—Matthew 26:36–46
    4      The Crucifixion—Matthew 27:45–56
    5      The Resurrection—Matthew 28
    6      The Norms of the Kingdom—Matthew 5:1–10
    7      The Witness of the Kingdom—Matthew 5:11–16
    8      Law and Love—Matthew 5:17–22
    9      Love and Lust—Matthew 5:27–30
    10      Integrity—Matthew 5:33–37
    11      Prayer and the Poor—Matthew 6:1–15
    12      Treasures—Matthew 6:19–24
    13      Rules for Relationships—Matthew 7:1–11
    14      Three Ways to Live—Matthew 7:13–27
    15      The World Will Hate You—Matthew 10:5–25
    16      Greatness in the Kingdom—Matthew 18:1–14
    17      Relationships in the Kingdom—Matthew 5:21–24; 18:15–20

Savior and Teacher: A Study of Matthew

    1      Healing the Sick—Matthew 8:5–17
    2      The Transfiguration—Matthew 17:1–13

Gospel in Life: Grace in the Case of Naaman

    1      How We Become Believers—2 Kings 5:1–14
    2      How We Live as Believers—2 Kings 5:2–3; 15–27
    3      How We Are Formed as Believers—Psalm 1:1–6; 150:1–6

Generosity: Studies from the Gospel of Luke

    1      Generosity and God’s Grace—Luke 18:9–17
    2      Generosity and Relationships—Luke 17:3–10
    3      Hospitality and God’s Grace—Luke 14:7–24
    4      Generosity and Ministry—Luke 9:49–10:2
    5      Generosity and Wealth—Part 2—Luke 16:1–14
    6      Generosity and Power—Luke 19:1–10

Generosity: Study from the Gospel of Luke

    1      Generosity and Wealth—Luke 18:18–30

Acts: The Gospel in the City

    1      The Ascension of Jesus—Acts 1:1–11
    2      The Descent of the Spirit—Acts 2:1–13
    3      The First Sermon—Acts 2:12–39
    4      The First Church—Acts 2:40–47
    5      The Birth of Jesus—Luke 2:1–7
    6      Responding to Jesus’ Birth—Luke 2:8–20







CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 8, 2012

Ephesians 5:5–21

  5 For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure, or greedy person—such a man is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient. 7 Therefore do not be partners with them.
  8 For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light 9 (for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth) 10 and find out what pleases the Lord. 11 Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them. 12 For it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
  13 But everything exposed by the light becomes visible, for it is light that makes everything visible. 14 This is why it is said: “Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.” 15 Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, 16 making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil. 17 Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
  18 Do not get drunk on wine, which leads to debauchery. Instead, be filled with the Spirit. 19 Speak to one another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your heart to the Lord, 20 always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 21 Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.

  This is the Word of the Lord



We are continuing to move through the book of Ephesians. We started several months ago. We continue to go through it section by section. We have here a long passage on what it means to live the Christian life, because that’s actually what the second half of Ephesians is about. Let’s remind ourselves of the outline, the framework.
Ephesians 1–3, the first part of the letter, is about what happens to us when we receive Christ by faith … what we become, what we receive when we receive Christ by faith. But now, in chapters 4, 5, and 6, Paul moves on to say, “What does it mean to live the Christian life?” How do we live as Christians?”
That is the right order, because it’s not that we live in a certain way and, therefore, become Christians. It’s that we become Christians and, therefore, we live in a certain way. If by living in a certain way we become Christians, then we would be saving ourselves by what we do. But if we become Christians, and then, as a result, live in a certain way, that’s because we’re saved not by what we do but by what Christ has done.
So Paul has begun, in these three chapters, to lay groundwork for helping us understand what it means to live in accord with what we are. In Ephesians 4:17 there is an aside that shows how sweeping this is, because Paul says to his readers, “I do not want you to live as the Gentiles live.” But they were Gentiles.
In other words, what he’s saying is Christianity is not just a kind of a vitamin supplement. It doesn’t just come into your life and give you a little boost to live a better form of the kind of life you’re living. It’s a sweeping revolution that affects every part of your life.
In this passage, there are actually three extremely important keys to understanding what it means to live the Christian life. We’re going to move through the passage. The first key is the longest, verses 5–14, where it talks about living in obedience. In verses 15–17 it talks about living in wisdom. In verses 18–21 it talks about living in joy.
To be a Christian entails knowing sin and walking in obedience, knowing the time and walking in wisdom, and knowing the Lord and walking in joy. We’re going to take a commensurate amount of time matching the length of the points, so the first one will be longest, the second one will be the shortest, and the third one will be a little longer than that. Just a heads up.


1. Know sin and walk in obedience

The first part of the passage, from verses 5–14 … To live as a Christian you have to know sin (know what it is) and walk in obedience. In this whole passage, Paul is saying to live as Christians we must have a sense of the horror, of the evil, of the danger of sin.
He gets that across by saying there have to be four things you know about sin if you’re going to live a Christian life. The first one is in verse 11 where he defines sin. He says, “Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness …” That’s one way to understand sin. That means externally to disobey the law of God, to disobey the things God says in his Word he wants us to do.
There’s an example of it up in the very first verse: “For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure, or greedy person … has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.” There are actually two case studies there of disobedience. The first is immoral, impure (and the word immoral there is the Greek word porneia, from which we get our word pornography, and it’s a word that means sexual immorality).
The second case is greed. Why would Paul choose just those two examples of ways of disobeying the law of God? I think they get across the comprehensiveness of the law of God. There are many churches in this country that actually say what the Bible says about sex is obsolete, but what it says about greed, materialism, injustice, and oppression is absolutely right and should be heeded.
There are other churches in this country that put a lot of emphasis on denouncing sexual immorality and making a pretty big show of it but at the same time essentially ignoring what the Bible says about greed and the importance of involvement with the poor and not spending too much of your money on yourself.
In other words, the law of God is so comprehensive it’s very difficult for people of particular temperaments to hold it all together. We have a tendency to either nullify or ignore part of it and lift up other parts. The law of God, though, is very comprehensive. All those things are wrong. Sin is disobedience in your behavior to the law of God, but it’s not just a matter of external behavior. Sin also has to do with internal motive. Paul brings that out in the very same verse.
In verse 5, he says, “No immoral, impure, or greedy person—such a man is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of … God.” There Paul is talking about the fact that it’s possible to not be doing something externally wrong. That is, you may be doing a behavior that is externally in compliance with the law of God, but internally, for a motive that makes it sinful anyway, because idolatry is the first of the Ten Commandments: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.”
That means, in brief, God is saying, “If there’s anything more important to you than me, anything that gives you more meaning in life than I do, anything that is a greater foundation for your sense of value and worth and significance than me, if there’s anything you love more than me, if there’s anything you center your life on more than me, that’s a god. It’s a religion.”
Even if it’s a good thing, even if your children are more important than God, or your career is more important than God, or some very noble political or social cause is more important than God, it will eat you alive, because anything you put in the place of God will fail to give you what only the true God can give you. You’ll be driven into the ground by it. You’ll be paralyzed by fears if something goes wrong with it. You’ll be despondent.
Do you see how comprehensive the definition is? Paul says if you’re going to live as a Christian, you’re going to have to understand what sin is, and he gives us this comprehensive understanding of sin being external disobedience to the law of God, and internal idolatry. But he doesn’t stop there.
He also wants you to see the power of sin in the human heart, because he doesn’t just say in verse 11, “Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness …” He doesn’t just say that, because those are sinful behaviors and activities. He then says in verse 8, “For you were once darkness …” Here he’s talking about human nature, and he’s saying something I think most people today would say is just too strong.
He says human beings do not just do deeds of darkness. They don’t just do bad things. They are darkness in their inmost being. That’s human nature. They are darkness. Some people say, “Well, that’s too negative. That’s one of the things I don’t like about the Bible. It’s just too negative about human nature.” Really?
I will not forget it. I’ve been trying to find a clip of it on the Internet, but I can’t find it. Some years ago, Mike Wallace interviewed a concentration camp survivor named Yehiel Dinur. The reason he interviewed him was … Some of you know in the Nazi Holocaust (the slaughter of Jews in Nazi Germany) one of the architects of the Holocaust was a man named Adolph Eichmann. He disappeared right after World War II and went into hiding, but he was caught, and in 1961 he was put on public trial.
In the trial, eye-witness survivors who had seen him doing the things he did, who were still alive, were brought in to witness against him and to testify. Yehiel Dinur was one of them. When Yehiel Dinur went into the court room (and this was caught on film), when he saw Eichmann he started to sob uncontrollably, and he collapsed. The judge had to pound the gavel because there was great disorder in the court, and it was very, very dramatic.
Mike Wallace showed Yehiel Dinur the clip of how he just collapsed, and how he just melted down. He said to him, “What happened? What were you feeling at that point? Was it post-traumatic stress? Was it that you were just filled with rage to see this man?” Yehiel Dinur said something I just think absolutely startled and flummoxed Mike Wallace.
He essentially said, “When I walked in and I saw him, I suddenly realized he was no demon. He was no superman. He was an ordinary human being exactly like me, and suddenly I became terrified about myself. I saw that I am capable of the same things.” That’s why he collapsed. I think Mike Wallace was saying, “What?” He looked into his own heart and he saw darkness.
Hannah Arendt was covering the trial as a journalist and then wrote her well-known essay, “Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil,” was making the same point. She was saying what we want to do in order to defend ourselves is to say about the Nazis, “These must have been monsters. These must have been sub-people. They weren’t like us. They must have been monsters to be able to do that.” That way we can say we would never do that.
She says by saying they’re sub-people, that’s exactly what they did to the Jews. Oh, no. They’re just people, just like us, and we do not want to admit what we’re capable of, that the seeds in our hearts are there. If they were properly watered and properly fertilized, you could do all the same things they did. There’s a darkness in the middle of the human heart. Paul says Christians are not living in denial about that. Many other people are. If you’re going to live a Christian life, you’ve got to see not just the definition of sin but the power of sin in the human heart.
But thirdly, it’s not just that. If you’re going to live a Christian life, you also have to see the guilt of sin, because Paul does the no-no here, at least in New York (not that he ever was here, but even these words are very much a no-no in New York). In verse 6 he says, “Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things [meaning sin] God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient. Therefore do not be partners with them.”
We don’t like the idea of a wrathful God, partly because we misunderstand the term wrath there. We’re thinking of somebody who is losing his temper and can’t control his emotions, but the word wrath in the Bible (in fact, the word wrath in ancient literature) is talking about subtle judicial condemnation. God’s wrath lies on sin because sin deserves punishment. That’s the idea, because sin incurs guilt, and if you sin you are guilty. You’re not just messed up. You’re guilty, and it deserves punishment. That’s what it means to say God’s wrath is upon all sin.
People really push back on this a lot. I’ve talked to people over the years who’ve said something like, “You know, the Bible’s teaching on this just doesn’t make sense to me.” I’ve had people say to me, “There are some people who deserve God’s wrath. There are nasty people. There are bad people out there, the Nazis, the Holocaust, you know, and they deserve God’s wrath. But most people are good people. I’m a good person. I’m not religious, but I’m a good person, and isn’t that what’s important?”
Think about this illustration. Imagine an old widowed woman who has one child. As she raises him she teaches him to always tell the truth, always work hard, and always care for the poor. Honesty, industry, and charity. She teaches him how she wants him to live, and he listens to her. Then, when he comes of age, she is a very poor woman, but she scrapes together her meager savings and what income she can, and she puts him through college, and he graduates.
Now imagine that after he graduates he never talks to her again. He sends her a Christmas card, but he doesn’t answer her e-mails. He doesn’t answer her phone calls. He doesn’t answer her letters. He doesn’t talk to her, but he’s good. He does everything she wants. He tells the truth, he works hard, and he cares for the poor. He says, “Hey, I’m doing what she wants. Isn’t that good enough?”
What would you say to him if you knew him? You’d say, “No! It is not acceptable simply to live a good life and ignore a relationship with the one person to whom you owe everything.” Now, if there is a God, and you say, “Well, I’m not religious, but I’m living a good life. Isn’t that what’s important?” the answer is no.
It’s condemnable. It’s as culpable as that young man would be. If there is a God to whom you owe everything, then just to live a good life in general and not live for God, and not make your relationship with him the central thing because you owe him everything, means you’re guilty. It’s condemnable, and a Christian understands that.
Here’s what’s so interesting. There are four things Paul tells you about sin. Christians cannot live an appropriate life if, first, they don’t understand the definition of it and how comprehensive it is, second, they don’t understand the power of it still in human nature, and third, they don’t understand the guilt of it.
Lastly, go back to verse 8 and look at what he says, “For you were once darkness …” He’s talking to Christians. “… but now you are light in the Lord.” You are light! What’s that metaphor mean? It’s not that hard to tell. What does the word light mean in the Bible? Paul actually tells you in the next verse it represents goodness, righteousness, and truthfulness.
What in the world, after everything he’s just said? How could any Christian, knowing all the other things Paul just talked to them about, say, “Look at me. Look at all my goodness. Look at all my truthfulness. Am I not so brilliant and beautiful in my moral excellence that you need to almost wear sunglasses to look at me?” Why would any Christian say, “I am light”?
The answer is you can say it if you’re careful about the prepositional phrase. It means everything. It links us back to the first part of the book of Ephesians. It says, “… you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord.” And in the first part of Ephesians, God says the moment you receive Christ, the moment you believe in him as your Savior, you are united to him. You are put in him.
In a sense, you’re put in him so although in yourself you are still darkness and you’re still flawed, in Christ God sees you as brilliant, as beautiful, as acceptable, as goodness and righteousness and truth. Isn’t that astounding? You say, “How can that be?” Well, that’s what we were spending a lot of time on in the first part of the series.
One more thing. Imagine a girl, and she’s poor and she’s plain. She doesn’t have a penny, and she’s not very attractive. But the great prince falls in love with her, and he puts his love upon her, and he takes her to be his wife. In the great wedding ceremony he brings her to himself and makes a vow, and do you know what happens in that ceremony?
They’re united. Do you know what that means? The minute before they are united legally by a vow, she’s poor, and immediately, she’s rich. She’s got money. She’s got money to burn. Not only that, he has decked her in the most beautiful jewels and the finest garments in the world that money can buy. Though in herself she’s plain, she’s a vision of loveliness.
You see, in herself she’s poor and she’s plain. But in the love of her prince, she’s light. She’s beautiful. She’s wealthy. That’s just a dim hint of what it means to be a Christian. Paul says you have to keep these things all in balance. I told you, of the three points, this is the long one, but I want you to see why it’s long and why it’s so important.
If you live a life only filled with guilt (“I’m so dark, I’m so awful, I have all this bad stuff in my life and I’m a mess, and everything I do makes me guilty”) you’re not going to live the Christian life you should. Weirdly enough, if you hate yourself, if you go around feeling self-loathing, you will not live an obedient life. You’ll just give in to temptation.
On the other hand, if you say, “Well, I’m fine. I’m accepted. God has forgiven me, so it really doesn’t matter how I live,” no! This whole passage is Paul saying, “Sin, avoid it. Flee it! Have nothing to do with it. It’s awful. Expose it! Call it what it is.” There’s a balance here of knowing you’re light in the Lord, and because you’re light in the Lord you want nothing to do with sin.
The balance perfectly comes out in one sentence in our Westminster Confession, which is the Presbyterians’ historic summary of what they believe the Bible teaches. In the Westminster Confession 15, part 4, is one sentence that says, “As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation; so there is no sin so great, that it can bring damnation upon those who truly repent.”
Sin is that bad and terrible, and grace is that free and available. Just as there is no sin so small but it deserves damnation (condemnation), so there is no sin so great it can bring condemnation on those who truly repent. If you live your life in the light of those two balancing truths, you will have an incentive to live in a godly way. You will be able to pick yourself up when you fail without destroying yourself and hating yourself for 10 years. You will, by knowing sin, walk in obedience.


2. Know the time and walk in wisdom

Briefly (because it’s brief), in verses 15, 16, and 17, Paul adds something that’s so important. There he’s evoking everything the Bible, and the Old Testament particularly, says about wisdom. He says, “Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, making the most of every opportunity … do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.”
It’s really brief, and frankly, I think most people who are reading this in English go right by it and hardly notice it, but it is a point all by itself. It’s saying living the Christian life is not just a matter of obeying the moral rules. God has given you a lot of them. We just talked about how comprehensive they are.
It’s also knowing the right way to live in the 80 percent of life situations to which the moral rules don’t apply. For example, here are two jobs. One job is a job in which a product is being produced based on slave labor in Madagascar. The other job is just a conventional job without any ethical challenges or anything like that (retail at some place, or something).
One of these jobs, according to the moral law of God, you can’t take. You cannot participate in the exploitation of slave labor in Africa. You can’t do that. Over here, there’s really no ethical reason you can’t take that job. You may say, “See, that’s how I can decide. I use the law of God to decide right or wrong.”
But you all know most jobs are morally permissible. There are all kinds of people you could marry, and none of them are ruled out by the law of God. There are all kinds of jobs you could take, and none of them are ruled out by the law of God. There are all kinds of choices you could make. You have all these options, and none of them are ruled out, yet some of them are wise and some of them are stupid. That’s what Paul is saying.
Being wise is not less than being moral, because he says in the second verse, “… do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.” The Lord’s will is always Scripture, what the Bible says. But the first part says, “Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, making the most of every opportunity …”
I’ll just take a second to unpack that a bit. How can you make some decisions when the law of God doesn’t directly say this is right or this is wrong? How do you decide which thing is the wise thing to do? First of all, literally, the word Paul uses there is not live, but walk. He literally says, “Look carefully at how you’re walking.”
The reason the English translators translate it as live is because in the Bible, walking is a metaphor for life. When it says walk with the Lord, it means live for the Lord. When it says walk in this way, it means live in this way. Okay, that’s fine, and yet the metaphor of thinking of living as a walk is actually helpful. Why? Because when you walk, you’re going somewhere. There’s always a direction.
Let’s just say you’re making a lot of money, or you’re trying to make a lot of money. Is there anything wrong with that? No. Look at Job. Look at Abraham. That’s fine. But for what purpose? What are you making your money for? What are you doing your job for? You’re trying to get up the career ladder. Fine. What are you trying to go up the career ladder for? What is your real purpose? What are the motives of your heart?
Is it to gain power? Is it to gain approval so people will like you? Is it to gain control over your environment because you feel like, “That’s how I get my security”? Or is it to serve God? Or is it to serve the people around you? You see, there’s nothing wrong with the activity, but be careful how you walk.
Look at the motives of your heart. Find out what you’re doing it for, because that will determine the impact of that activity on your soul and on the souls and the lives of the people around you. If you don’t do due diligence to try to find out what your motives are, and if you don’t expect a great amount of self-deception on your way to finding out where your heart really is, then you’re a fool. That’s what he’s saying. Do you know how to do that?
Then the second part of the passage, verse 16, says, “… making the most of every opportunity …” Literally, Paul says there redeeming the time. What he means is if you know your heart, and you know the Word of God, then when you see the options in front of you, which is the most strategic? Which is the best use of your time? Which one will bring the most good? Which is the best for you and your gifts? Which is the best for the people around you?
If you have too high a view of your own abilities, or too low a view of your own abilities, you’re going to make foolish decisions. Wisdom is a matter of understanding human nature. If you’re always disillusioned and amazed people are doing this to you, then you don’t understand human nature, and you’re going to make foolish decisions. This is an extremely important part of what it means to be a Christian.
Do not think being a Christian is a nice mechanical thing where you get the rule book and you follow it. You do have to follow the rule book, but you’ll find the rule book doesn’t apply to all kinds of things you have to do in life. Therefore, the growth and wisdom that comes from knowing the Word of God, knowing your own motives, knowing human nature, and knowing times and seasons, so you can redeem the time and make strategic decisions, is a critical part of being a Christian.


3. Know the Lord and walk with joy

The last section is very well known. It’s verses 18–21. It’s what it means to be filled with the Spirit. We’ve often in our teaching ministry at Redeemer looked at this whole passage at length. I’m not going to do that right now. That’s one of the reasons I tacked it on here. I want you to see how it fits in the whole context.
August 10, 2010 (not that long ago), I preached a whole sermon on this passage. There are other ones too, so there is no reason for us to break it all down. Here’s the bottom line, or maybe I should say here’s the big picture. At the heart of what it means to live the Christian life is joy. “Do not get drunk on wine … Instead, be filled with the Spirit.”
Why would Paul contrast those two things? Only for this reason. He’s saying being filled with the Spirit is to get the thing people get drunk to get. He’s saying you don’t have to get drunk to get the joy, the roaring joy the Spirit gives. Besides that, we all know, I guess, alcohol makes you happy because it’s a depressant. That doesn’t mean it makes you depressed. It means it’s a chemical that depresses part of the brain.
You know, you get in trouble so you get drunk. Why do you feel happier? Because your brain is less aware of your problems. The Spirit operates on the exact opposite principle. The Spirit does not make you less aware of your problems. It makes you more aware of your resources. The Spirit takes the work of Jesus Christ. It takes the person of Christ, the work of Christ, what he’s done, and what you might know with your head, and makes it so real to your heart that you begin to say, “So, what were the problems?”
In other words, the reason we fail to be obedient, and the reason we tend to make foolish choices in life, is because we’re not happy enough in Christ. Why do you make stupid decisions? So often it’s because you’re so empty and unhappy inside that you make stupid decisions. Why do you disobey? Why do you give in to temptation? Why do you blow up and then wish you hadn’t blown up? Why do you do these things and say, “Why did I do that?” Because you weren’t happy enough to be obedient.
I know it sounds strange to hear a Presbyterian say this. There has to be a fountain of joy in the middle of your life. It comes because the Spirit fills you. That doesn’t mean so much you get more of the Spirit. The trouble with this metaphor filled with the Spirit is it sounds like you only have a pint of the Spirit. You need two pints.
But actually, if I had the time to show you what the grammar and the language means, it means to be dominated by what the Spirit thinks and does. What does the Spirit do? Jesus tells you in his Upper Room Discourse in John 16. He says when the Comforter comes (that’s the Holy Spirit), when the Counselor comes, when the Advocate comes, when the Holy Spirit comes, “he will glorify me.”
I know Jesus Christ was the only obedient person who ever lived, but then he died on the cross to take the curse from my disobedience. When I am moved by that and amazed by that, it makes me want to be obedient. I see Jesus Christ living a wise life, and not a foolish life. I see his consummate wisdom on the cross, where somehow, beyond what anybody else would ever have been able to come up with (and only God in his divine wisdom was able to do it), the law of God and the love of God were both fulfilled at once.
On the cross, the law of God was satisfied, and that way he doesn’t have to punish us, but if the love of God was satisfied, now he can save us, and now we can be a light in the Lord. To the degree the Holy Spirit takes those things you might know with your head and captures your heart with them, you will be happy enough to be obedient and wise.
It’s making Jesus as glorious as he really is in your eyes. It dominates you. That’s what it means to be filled with the Spirit. And if you are filled with the Spirit, what happens? You go around always singing in your heart. Isn’t that an amazing thing? Paul says the mark that you’re filled with the Spirit is you live a life of gratitude toward God, you live a life of service to other people (verses 20–21), but you walk around inside your heart always making music. You don’t just walk around thinking about God. You walk around singing. There’s an internal music.
Jonathan Edwards wrote his future wife, Sarah Pierpont, a love letter when he was 20 and she was almost 14. You can read this whole letter. It’s not very long. I’m only going to read you the beginning and the end. It was a mash note, we used to call it. It was a love letter to her. You can find it online.
I realized the other day what he was actually doing was seeing the fullness of the Spirit, exactly as Paul describes it, in this young woman, and he was falling in love with it. This is what he says; the beginning and the end. By the way, this was written in the 1720s, or something like that.
He says, “They say there is a young lady in New Haven who is beloved of that almighty Being, who made and rules the world, and that there are certain seasons in which this great Being, in some way or other invisible, comes to her and fills her mind with exceeding sweet delight, and that she hardly cares for anything, except to meditate on Him. She will sometimes go about, singing sweetly, from place to place, and seems to be always full of joy and pleasure, and no one knows for what. She loves to be alone, and to wander in the fields and on the mountains, and seems to have someone invisible always conversing with her.”
Don’t you want a life like that? Who knows? Maybe Jonathan Edwards was exaggerating. Maybe he was infatuated, and she wasn’t anywhere near as happy in Christ as this. Maybe she was like that, and maybe she wasn’t, but Paul says you can be like that. You may not be a Christian, or you may be a Christian and not living anything like this. All I can say to you is, “Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.” Let’s pray.

Our Father, we thank you for this kind of helicopter ride over this passage in which we see how much there is involved with living a Christian life. How revolutionary it would be if we understood sin, understood wisdom, and knew the joy the Spirit can give us so we are also walking about always sweetly singing to ourselves, full of joy, and no one knowing quite for what, always having somebody invisible conversing with us.

Oh Lord, we really do long for that kind of joyful life, and we ask that you would make it more a reality in our lives as we take up the bread and the cup, for there you so often meet with your people over your table. We pray this in Jesus’ name, amen.







MARRIAGE IN CHRIST

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 15, 2012

Ephesians 5:21–33

  21 Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ. 22 Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord. 23 For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the Savior. 24 Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
  25 Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her 26 to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, 27 and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless. 28 In this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.
  29 After all, no one ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cares for it, just as Christ does the church—30 for we are members of his body. 31 “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” 32 This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church. 33 However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.

  This is God’s Word



This passage is like a fair number of people in New York City. It’s both rich and famous. Because it’s so rich, you could easily work through it word by word and get quite a bit out of it. But it’s also advantageous to do what we’re about to do, which is to fly over the whole thing and call out the main points by which we will get a panoramic view of the immense biblical wisdom on this subject of marriage. What we learn about marriage here is what it is, what it does, what it needs, and what it shows.


1. What marriage is

What’s the essence of marriage? What’s the definition of marriage? This is perhaps the New Testament spot in the Bible about marriage. Paul quotes the main Old Testament text on marriage, so you have it all right here. Down in verse 31, he says, “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” That’s a quote from Genesis 2:24.
When it says, “A man shall leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,” some of you recall that older English translations say, “A man will leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife.” The Hebrew word there in Genesis 2:24 is the word that basically means covenant. A covenant is a deep, exclusive, permanent, legal and personal, binding commitment. A covenant.
The essence of marriage, then, is not a declaration of present love, as important as that is. To say, “I love you” is not marriage. You can say that and not be married. Marriage is not so much a declaration of present love; it’s the binding promise of future love. It’s a promise not to feel warm and loving all the time, because nobody can promise that. It’s a promise to be loving and tender and faithful and cherishing and serving, regardless of the ups and downs of emotions or circumstances, long term, through thick and thin.
That’s the essence of marriage. It’s a covenant. It’s not the declaration of present love; it’s the promise of future love. I don’t think I have to tell you (but I will anyway) this is a complete collision with our culture, which doesn’t see the most important thing to be covenant but chemistry. For example, in 2008, there was a moviemaker, Dana Adam Shapiro … He was a single man, and he noticed a lot of his 30-something friends’ marriages were breaking up and they were getting divorces.
So he interviewed 50 couples who were breaking up, and then he did a film about it. The film was called Monogamy. A year and a half ago or so, there was an article in the New York Times magazine about it. I’m telling you about it, because his attitude was pretty typical. After doing all this study, he concluded there is an “intractable difficulty” with monogamy. What was it?
He went on to say passion and sexual chemistry need spontaneity. Marriage, by definition, is something that’s obligatory. What you do in marriage is a matter of duty because it’s obligatory. So if passion and chemistry need spontaneity and marriage is all about duty, marriage inevitably stifles it. It’s impossible to get that spontaneity, that chemistry, going, because the covenantal nature of marriage inevitably stifles it, so it’s not surprising that there’s an intractable difficulty with marriage.
Now in complete opposition to that, the great poet, W.H. Auden, said, “… any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate.” Can I repeat that with the stress on the word any? Think about this. A brilliant man, a great poet, W.H. Auden, says, “… any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate.” Why? Because, he says, marriage is “not the involuntary result of fleeting emotion but the creation of time and will.”
Why would that be? How could anybody say that any marriage (the creation of time and will), happy or unhappy, is more interesting than any romance, however passionate? Covenant is far more interesting than chemistry, in other words. How could anybody say that? Well, imagine a person with a view that chemistry is what really matters asking me a kind of combative question.
Imagine the person coming up to me and saying, “Think of the first time you kissed your future wife. Thirty-eight years later, does it have the same electrical thrill to it? Hmm?” My answer would be, “No, and I should hope not.” Here’s the reason why. That chemistry you’re talking about, that first electrical thrill, the very first time you kiss or touch somebody, is largely ego. It’s largely about you. That’s why you’re so excited. It’s not really love; it’s more ego.
What’s so thrilling and electrical about it is this person whom you think is pretty great is into you, is responding to you. So this deep need for affirmation you have, that every human being has, is getting filled. Of course that feels wonderful. I want you to know the incredible thrill of knowing this pretty great person likes you isn’t anything like the electrical thrill of actually loving the other.
See, that is all about you, but to actually love someone, to actually be so absolutely committed to somebody else’s joy and happiness and well-being that you would cut your right arm off, that you would die for that person … That’s a strong feeling. That’s passion too, and that’s not the same. You can have a so-called night of passion and not be willing to make any sacrifices at all, which shows it’s about you.
How does that other kind of passion, that other kind of thrill, develop? It takes a long time. First of all, you have to get to know who that person really is. At the very beginning, when you think you’re falling in love with someone, you’re always falling in love with your image of the person, not the real person. It takes a long time to find out who that person is, and vice versa.
Secondly, you have to make sacrifices. You have to walk through difficulties. There have to be confrontations and reconciliations. As time goes on, it shifts from the thrill of this great person liking you to your love of that person, your desire for that person, your commitment to see that person flourish and thrive, even at great cost to yourself. That’s a passion too, and that grows.
That’s a thrill too, but it’s a thrill that contrasts with that first thrill the way a river contrasts with a mud puddle. It’s covenant, not chemistry. That’s the meaning of life. Any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate. The essence of marriage is covenant. It’s not the declaration of present thrill; it’s the binding promise of future love.


2. What marriage does

What is its purpose? I’m going to try to give you two. There are way more in the passage, of course. It’s a rich and famous passage. There’s more than I can get out, but let me give you two purposes the Bible says for marriage: it cleanses and it meshes. First, it cleanses. Look at this very, very famous verse:
“Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.”
Okay, let’s ask the question … What’s Christ’s purpose when he comes into your life? What is he coming for? Well, you say, he’s coming to be adored, to be worshiped. Yeah, sure. But is that all? No. He’s coming to bring about change. He’s coming into our lives because we are spiritually twisted, blemished, and ugly, and he wants to make us spiritually brilliant and beautiful.
We’re told that’s the basis of marriage: your spouse comes into your life not to be your savior but to partner with the Savior to bring you to become the person Christ is making you to be. Again, let’s do a little contrast here. If you ask our culture now, “What’s the purpose of marriage? Why do the marriage thing?” it’s not too hard to infer.
You can tell from empirical studies and from ads for dating and relationship services. Empirical studies show increasingly young single adults say, “I want someone who will not change me.” The ads say the same thing. “I’m looking for somebody who will accept me for who I am, not try to change me.”
Okay, you’re not getting married to be changed, so why are you getting married? The only answer I can tell would be it’s to supplement me, to enhance my life. In other words, “I’m fine the way I am. I don’t want anybody to try to change me. I want companionship and romance and added income and things like that. I don’t want to be changed. Nobody should change me.”
The Bible says romance, companionship, fun, and partnership are all extremely important, but they will be enhanced if you begin with this admission: you are not fine as you are. You are flawed. You have all kinds of problems. You’re nowhere close to being the person God created you to be. When you understand that, then you begin to recognize what God says the purpose of marriage is and, therefore, what your spouse comes into your life to do.
What you want is a person who understands what God is doing in your life. If you’re a believer in Jesus, Philippians 1:6 says the good work he began in you when you believed he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ. What is that good work? You’re just a shadow of who you’re supposed to be. If you get to know somebody Jesus is changing, you see the person who’s there and you like that person, but you also see the person God is creating.
Sometimes you get glimpses of the future. You get glimpses of a wisdom, of a courage, of an insight. You get glimpses of the future glorious self Jesus Christ is creating. It’s in there, but it’s sometimes covered by all the crap. If we can, Kathy and I love to travel in the western mountainous parts of the British Isles, whether it’s Wales or England or Scotland.
Those of you who are from there or those of you who have tried to travel there know that as beautiful as the mountains are, it always rains there. If you go there for four days, you’ll be very fortunate if one day you actually can see the mountains. What happens is you look up there and it’s all cloudy and you can’t see a thing, and then one day the clouds part and there’s this breathtaking mountain. Then, of course, after a while the clouds come back and you can’t see it anymore.
That’s how all of us are, actually. Every so often the clouds part, and you can see in yourself or in your friends in whom Jesus is working the glorious, wonderful thing God is making them into, and then usually the clouds roll back in. Your flaws and bad habits and besetting sins obscure it. Here’s what we need in our lives.
First of all, we need Christian community. We need fellowship. That means you need brothers and sisters around you who not only love you for what you are, but also are particularly excited about what God is making you. Christian marriage, then, is a uniquely intense form of Christian fellowship. What you need in your life is someone who comes into your life and says, “I love you. I’m also excited about what God is making you. I see the great thing God is doing in your life, and it excites me.
I want to be a part; I want to partner with Christ in helping you grow in grace and become that, and I want you to partner with Christ in the same thing in my life, so that someday we’ll stand before the throne, and all of the bad things, all of the sins and flaws, will have fallen off, and we’ll finally be the people God actually created us to be. We’ll be absolute beauties, and we’ll look at each other and say, ‘I always knew you could be like this.’ ”
That’s the purpose of marriage. Are you getting a nosebleed yet? Okay, let’s bring it down to earth. If that’s really the purpose of marriage, to cleanse one another, to partner with the Savior in helping your spouse become the future glory self that God is making him or her … You say, “Well, that’s awfully lofty.” I’ll bring it down to earth. I’ll give you three very practical implications.
First, you get into marriage expecting confrontation. You expect to clash. You expect you’re going to be speaking the truth in love to each other. You expect you’re going to talk to each other about things that need to be changed. You’re not going to come in saying, “Oh, I don’t want anybody to change me.” You’re not going to come in and as soon as you have your first clash say, “Oh my goodness, I didn’t marry the right person.”
If you have married the right person … In fact, if you are really married, marriage is going to bring you to confront the things that are wrong with you in a way no other relationship has been able to do. It’s going to get through to you. You’re going to get out of denial about who you are. So first of all, you expect that kind of thing. You expect the give and take. You expect the clashing. You expect it to be done speaking the truth in love, but you expect it.
Years ago, somebody said to me (I’ve never forgotten it, and probably some of you have heard me say this before) marriage is like a gem tumbler. It’s two rough stones put into a tumbler. They tumble around. They knock the rough edges off each other. When they come out they’re beautiful. But how did they get beautiful? Through knocking the rough edges off each other. So first of all, you expect the clashes, and you’re not shocked by it.
Secondly, who do you choose to marry? You know what you do. People say to me, “But shouldn’t I be really deeply attracted to the person I marry?” Yeah, but I would like you to have a comprehensive attraction. Why not be attracted to something in the person that you know will be getting stronger as you get older, not weaker?
Most of us say, “I want to marry him or her because of …” What? Well, I can tell you, however you want to describe it, it will probably get weaker and weaker as you get older. It has to do with looks or something like that. Why not choose something that could get stronger? That’s comprehensive attraction. In other words, instead of choosing people on the basis of looks and money and connections and things like that, you should be saying, “I need to find somebody who can be my best friend and my most trusted counselor.”
Here’s what you’re doing. You walk into a room. You see ten people of the desired gender. You immediately rule out seven of them on the basis of the stuff that will fade as you get older. Then you go after those three, hoping maybe one of them could be a best friend and trusted counselor, but you left your best prospects back there at your first cut. Who are you choosing? Who are you looking toward to be your spouse? It should be someone who will be your very best friend, your most trusted counselor.
The third thing is when people say, “But there needs to be chemistry; there needs to be this really great attraction,” I say, “Well yeah, but I want you to know there’s nothing more attractive than to be loved by somebody you respect.” In the very beginning, it’s fairly easy to respect somebody because of résumé and the figure they cut, but 10 years later, who will you respect?
You’re going to respect somebody who knows how to make changes, somebody who’s going to be there for you, somebody who knows how to speak the truth in love, somebody who’s willing to sacrifice for you and make changes for you. That’s the kind of person you respect. There is nothing more wonderful than to be loved by somebody you respect. As J.R.R. Tolkien said, “The praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards.” Now completely rethink your marriage searching and your understanding of your marriage in light of the purpose of marriage.
The other thing marriage does is it meshes. What I’m about to do is what my wife Kathy calls “stunt preaching.” Stunt preaching is this. In the next four and a half minutes, I’m going to take you in and out of a subject that is culturally supercharged with controversy. I’m going to take you in and out to show you what the Bible says but to not allow the subject to hijack the rest of the sermon. Watch. Observe.
Here’s a second purpose of marriage: it’s to bridge the gap between the genders. Have you noticed the way the wife’s role is described and the way the husband’s role is described are not identical? They recognize differences between the genders in marriage. The Bible doesn’t just come and say the wife’s role and the husband’s role, the male’s role and the female’s role, are exactly the same. No, it doesn’t do that.
Why not? Because the Bible takes our gender differences and our gendered difference seriously. It doesn’t ignore it the way modern culture does and just assumes everybody is going to do exactly the same thing, no matter how deeply different we are. It not only takes the gender differences seriously, but it gives us a way to allow the genders to complement one another and mesh together in a marriage for the health and enrichment of the whole relationship.
Now how does the Bible do that? It does it brilliantly, because it lays down one, and actually only one, principle. This is a basic principle. It’s a far-reaching principle. It’s a controversial principle. But it’s also incredibly flexible. What is that principle? It says it’s headship. It says, “Wives, let your husbands be your head in the marriage.” What does headship mean? You may have heard all sorts of things. I probably have studied it as much as anybody here.
Not everybody is going to agree with me, but from what I can understand, whatever else the Bible means by headship, it means final say. It means leadership. It means saying, “Wives, if you want to get in touch with your own gender difference and husbands with your own gender difference, adopt this as a principle: in the end, the husband has leadership and has the final say. When you can’t agree, let him have the final say. Let him have the authority in the relationship.” That’s how you mesh. That’s how you bridge the gap.
Now as soon as you hear that principle, right away you’re already thinking, “Oh, that means, that means, that means …” No, wait. The Bible gets control of this and won’t let you just throw in your own content. It tells you two things in the text that take control of this whole idea of headship in marriage. The first thing it says is the man must never exercise headship to please himself. Look. It says, “Love your wives as Christ loved the church and sacrificed, died, for her, gave himself up for her.”
That principle, which is in verse 25, is the husband must never do anything just to please himself. It’s the husband’s job to always put the needs and desires of his wife ahead of his own. Always. Which means this. Let’s say you have to buy a car, husband and wife, and you can’t agree. The wife really wants to buy a red car, and the husband wants to buy a blue car, and you can’t agree.
Does the husband say, “Honey, remember Ephesians 5:22. I’m the head, so it’s the blue car”? No, because the wife can say, “Honey, remember Ephesians 5:25. You’re supposed to die for me. This is sort of short of that.” She’s right. The point is if you’re following Christ, as a husband, you must never use your headship to just please yourself. In fact, you should always be trying to find ways in which to put your wife’s desires and needs ahead of your own. Of course you should let her have the red car if it gives her joy. That’s your job.
You say, “Well, what’s headship about, then?” You only overrule your wife when the two of you are working on something and you can’t agree, and you believe the way she’s going wouldn’t be good for her or you or the marriage, or something like that. Somebody has to make the final call, and you make the final call. That’s when you overrule your wife: only when you think you’re doing the best thing for you both, never just to please yourself.
The second principle is there are almost no cultural details given in the Bible to this principle. The Bible says, “Wives, let your husbands be head.” Now I know a lot of guys, a lot of traditional-minded people, say, “Right. That’s right. In my family, the husband did this and this and this, and the wife did this, and that’s how it’s going to be.” The Bible doesn’t give you details. It says, “Here’s the principle. Now you work out the details.”
Why wouldn’t the Bible give you details? Why doesn’t it say who gets control of the checkbook, and what about working? Why doesn’t it say anything like that? Because the Bible is giving you a principle for all times, places, cultures, centuries. It would be stupid to give you details. Don’t you see? It’s form and yet freedom.
The Bible is saying don’t reject the principle of male headship, because that gets you in touch with your gender difference and helps you mesh, but you must agree on what that works out to be. You must agree on the details. You work it out yourselves based on your personalities, your temperaments, your time and place, your culture. You work it out.
Don’t you dare have anybody come in and say, “Well, in my family, the husband did this, the wife did this, so we’re married …” So what? It says the man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. You can’t say that. You can’t go back there. You have to work it out. Liberals don’t like the principle of male headship. Conservatives want to bring in all of their cultural details. The Bible doesn’t go either direction.


3. What marriage needs

I’ll just tell you, and then I’ll show you where the Bible says it. The Bible says if marriage is going to work, you need a Holy Spirit-powered, gospel-based ability to do love philanthropy. That’s the key to marriage. Unless you have that, marriage won’t work. That’s what you need. What?
Now notice we started the text with verse 21, which was actually covered in last week’s message. It says, “Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.” If you were here last week, you’ll know this is actually the last clause in a long sentence that stretches back to verse 18. In 5:18, Paul says, “Be filled with the Spirit.” We talked about this last week. What does it mean to be filled with the Spirit? Paul explains.
To be filled with the Spirit is actually explained by John 16, where Jesus says, “When the Holy Spirit comes, he will take what you know of me, and he will glorify me.” Paul talks about it in Ephesians 3:17. The Holy Spirit’s job, as it were, is to take the things you may know with your head … Do you know Jesus died for you? Do you know he loved you enough to die for you?
The Holy Spirit takes what Jesus did on the cross and makes it existentially alive to you. You grasp it. You grasp how wide and high and deep and long is the love of Christ, and it becomes a blazing fire in your heart. Paul goes on and says what it means to be filled with the Spirit. He describes it. First, you’re always going around singing inside. Remember? Inner music.
You’re not just thinking, “Oh, I’m a Christian.” You’re singing. You’re making melody, Paul says. You’re always amazed at his grace. Amazing grace, amazing love. The last thing he mentions is that will make it possible for you to submit to one another out of reverence for Christ. When you have this incredible inner love and joy, a sense of God’s love in your heart, it makes it easier for you to serve other people. That’s verse 21.
Then suddenly, in verse 22, he says, “Wives, submit to your husbands.” Now wait a minute. He’s talking about the fullness of the Spirit. He’s talking about having your soul sloshing with God’s existential, experiential love. Then he starts talking about marriage, wives, husbands. Why isn’t there any transition? Why doesn’t he say, “Okay, readers, I’m talking about the fullness of the Spirit, but now I’m going to talk to you about marriage”? Why is there no transition?
There’s no transition because he hasn’t changed the subject. What he’s saying is marriage will never work unless you assume this. This is the presupposition. Unless you know God’s love existentially, powerfully, in your heart of hearts, you will not actually be able to do what you should do in marriage. Why not?
Remember I mentioned love philanthropy? What do I mean by that? You know what a philanthropist is. It’s a man or woman who’s getting so much money over here that he or she can give away all kinds of money over here. Why can a philanthropist give so much money away to charity? Not investment, where you get a return, but so much money away. Why can he do that? Because he’s getting so much over here he can give so much away.
There is no way you will ever come to the place I’ve been talking about, a place that through thick and thin, through conflicts and reconciliations, through times of difficulty and sacrificial service, that initial selfish, egocentric, electrical charge turns into real deep oneness and love … You’re never going to get there unless you can love your spouse during times in which your spouse is distracted, during times in which your spouse is discouraged or sick, during times in which your spouse is not being the spouse he or she should be.
If your spouse is the main source of love and happiness in your life and you either don’t have a relationship with God or the relationship with God is not existentially real to you, it’s something you subscribe to but it’s not a real present reality in your life … If your real source of meaning and hope and love and joy is your spouse, then when your spouse stops giving you the love he or she should give you, when the spouse criticizes you or has a problem or goes through a rough patch, you’re going to melt down.
Do you know why? You can only keep giving love as long as you’re getting it. As long as you’re giving love to your spouse and your spouse is giving you love back, fine. But when you have to give love and your spouse isn’t giving you much back, you’re going to freak out. Why? You don’t have any other source. When your spouse criticizes you, if he or she is the main source of love in your life, you’re going to freak out. You’re going to melt down.
If your spouse goes through a big time in which he or she is not being the spouse he or she ought to be, you’re going to say, “Well, you’re not being the spouse you ought to be; I can’t be the spouse I ought to be,” and you’ll withdraw. You’ll break down. You might go looking for chemistry somewhere else.
But what if you love God more than your spouse? Then you’ll love your spouse well. What if you get all this love from him? Like I said, it’s just sloshing around in the center of your being. Then during those times, you’ll be able to do love philanthropy. You’ll be able to love even when you’re not getting much love back.
How will you have this incredible Holy Spirit-powered, gospel-based ability to do love philanthropy, which you desperately need if your marriage is ever going to come to a place of strength and wholeness? It comes from the gospel, the Holy Spirit making the gospel real. What is the gospel? Jesus Christ was the perfect spouse. Do you see the spousal love of Jesus?
Jesus made us. The Lord created us. Then, Genesis says, we turned away from him. We went away from him. What did Jesus do? Did he say, “Well, you’re not being the spouse you should be; I’m not going to be the spouse I should be”? No. He came to earth. He emptied himself. He went to the cross. He gave himself for us. Husbands, wives, look at how Christ loved us and gave himself for us, the ultimate spousal love.
When he was up there on the cross looking down at us being terrible spouses … killing him, betraying him, denying him, mocking him … in one of the great acts of spousal love in history, he stayed. He spoke the truth in love to us, and he didn’t leave us. Through that death came resurrection. If you know he loves you like that, if the Holy Spirit brings that home to your heart, you will have …
If you love God more than you love your spouse, you will love your spouse well, and if your spouse is the main source of love in your life, you will not love your spouse well. I want you to see when Paul says, “This is the thing you need: you need the fullness of the Spirit or you’re not going to be able to do what you’re supposed to do …” I don’t want you to think, by the way, that means only Christians can have good marriages, but here’s what you have to understand.
People who are not Christians who have good marriages have good marriages because, whether they know it or not, they’re walking in Jesus’ footsteps. They’re recapitulating the gospel. They’re sacrificing. It’s the self-giving love of Christ they’re actually acting out in their marriages, whether they know it or not. See, when you are acting out the gospel, you love your spouse not because he or she is lovely but to make them lovely, because that’s what Jesus did for us.


4. What marriage shows

Paul says, “This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church.” This image in the Old Testament, that God is like a husband and Israel is like his bride, and this image in the New Testament, that Christ is like our husband and we are like his bride, is not just a metaphor. According to Revelation, it points to a reality that someday, at the end of time, there will be the marriage supper of the Lamb, that Jesus Christ is going to unite with us, that we are really going to fall into his arms.
Let me say it as vividly as I can. The Bible says human marriage is, therefore, penultimate. It points to the ultimate marriage. Even the most wonderful, rapturous episode of marital love is just a dim hint of the ecstasy and cosmic joy of falling into the Lord’s arms, because that’s what you were created for. Human love is just a pointer to that. Human love is penultimate. That’s the ultimate marriage.
Unless you see what marriage shows and points to, you won’t be single well or married well. What do I mean by that? First of all, you won’t be single well. Why not? Well, there are two ways not to be single well. First is to want too much to be married, so you’re so unhappy. “Oh, my life is over because I’m not married.” The other actually is to be single and not want to be married enough, to be afraid of marriage or to hate the idea.
If you see human marriage is penultimate, you’ll be single well. Why? Because you’ll know, “Gee, I’d like to be married, but the ultimate marriage, the ultimate set of arms, the ultimate marriage feast, because I believe in Jesus Christ, awaits me. The one I really need, the one that will really satisfy me, that no human marriage can satisfy, is mine.” Only when you understand that will you not let your single state throw you.
On the other hand, if you don’t know that human marriage is penultimate, you won’t be married well either, because you will try to make your spouse or marriage itself give you what only Christ can give you, and that will crush your marriage under that expectation. Oh no. I remember years ago having a terrible day with Kathy. It was my fault. (It’s not always my fault.) I remember falling into bed, after having studied this text in the morning, and thinking, after a hard day of marriage, “This is a profound mystery.”
I was making a joke to myself, but I was wrong. What’s a profound mystery about marriage is not that it’s hard. Actually, it makes perfect sense. Is your relationship with God hard? Yes. Is it glorious? Yes. Is it the most rewarding possible thing? Yes. It shouldn’t surprise us that marriage is too. This is the profound mystery: marriage helps us understand what the gospel is about, and the gospel gives us the power to be either married or unmarried very well. Think on that. Let us pray.

Our Father, we thank you that you’ve just flown us over this panorama and shown us the immense biblical wisdom of marriage. There has probably never been a culture, place, or time that most needed this, though we’ve always needed it. I pray that you would help us, every person hearing this, to order our lives in accord with it. O Lord, most of all, let your Holy Spirit apply this teaching to every person in this room’s life where they need it, and we ask that you would grant this, because we ask for it through Jesus. In his name we pray, amen.







WORK AND FAMILY

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 22, 2012

Ephesians 6:1–9

  1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2 “Honor your father and mother”—which is the first commandment with a promise—3 “that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.”
  4 Fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord. 5 Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ. 6 Obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you, but like slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart.
  7 Serve wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not men, 8 because you know that the Lord will reward everyone for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free. 9 And masters, treat your slaves in the same way. Do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.

  This is the Word of the Lord



We keep on going through the book of Ephesians, and it’s helpful to remember in the beginning, the first three chapters of Ephesians, there’s all this heavy doctrine, all this heavy theology about what it means to be a Christian and who we are in Christ and grace and the cross and redemption and union with Christ and so on.
Then when you get to chapters 4, 5, and 6, suddenly it gets incredibly practical, and it’s not actually a different subject. Paul is showing us throughout this book what it means to be the church, what it means to be a Christian. What it means to be a Christian is to be basically theologically driven. It means theology, doctrine, stuff about the Trinity and about the cross and about the atonement and about grace and about redemption.
All those things have an effect on how we live in every area of our practical lives. Two of those areas are now laid out for us: work and family. Even though it’s actually in some ways, as you will see, a bit of a difficulty for me to have to cover all this in one sermon, on the other hand, it’s helpful to look at the big picture and to see how Christ really is Lord of every area of life. So let’s take a look at this under these three headings: Jesus and your work, Jesus and your family, and Jesus and your life.


1. Jesus and your work

We’re looking at the section from verses 5–9, and here Paul is laying out principles for your work life. Right away, we have to do something. I’m going to try to keep it to a couple of minutes. The very fact that Paul says, “Slaves, obey your masters. Masters, don’t misuse your slaves,” we can’t get past that right away. We say, “Wait a minute. Why in the world weren’t the early Christians immediately abolishing slavery?”
One of the things you have to remember before we can get into the principles is a couple of things. First of all, it’s impossible for us today to read Paul talking to slaves in the first-century, Roman Empire/Ephesus without thinking they were the same as the slaves in America in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. We have to keep in mind the differences that are enormous here right away.
The Anchor Yale Bible Dictionary, which is a scholarly dictionary by historians and scholars of ancient history, points something out. It says it’s very hard for us Americans today and any modern people to read what the Bible says here and think Paul is talking to people who are in the same condition as the slaves were in America. It’s not true. There are a couple of things you need to know.
First, slavery in the Roman Empire was not based on race at all. Secondly, it was not lifetime. The vast majority of slaves were only slaves till they were 30 years old. After that they were not. Thirdly, slaves couldn’t quit. They couldn’t make demands. They couldn’t negotiate for salary and all that. I’m paraphrasing, but The Anchor Yale Bible Dictionary says this:
“Despite those clear legal distinctions between owners and slaves, persons in slavery did not constitute a different social or economic class. Slaves’ social status, their lifestyle, their economic opportunities, even their education, were tied to the status of the respective masters, and they developed no recognizable consciousness of being a group or of suffering a common plight.
For this reason any call like, ‘Slaves of the world, unite,’ would have fallen on completely deaf ears in the ancient times. In fact, rather than look for work, each day without any certainty, many people in those days sold themselves into slavery to gain job security.”
As soon as you hear that, you say, “Wait a minute, that’s not the slavery I’m thinking about it.” That’s right. It wasn’t great, but it wasn’t until it became the virulent, race-based, violent, brutal, lifetime slavery that happened in the Caribbean and in the New World in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that Christians rose up and said it has to be abolished. Do you have that?
In fact, actually years ago a friend of mine was doing a PhD in US History at Yale, and in his seminar with his advisors, his advisors said historians don’t think the way most people do. We all knew that. He says most people say, “How could those people in the past have ever put up with this horrible thing?”
They said the historian says, “Why, since every society in every culture in every century throughout all of human history had always accepted slavery in some form, where in the world did the idea come from that it was wrong? Who would’ve ever thought of that?” I remember my friend who was the student was a believer, and his advisors were not Christian believers.
They said, “We know where it came from. It came from the evangelicals, the Quakers, and some Catholics, who got it out of the Bible.” Having said all that, can we from now on think about bosses and employees as we see what Paul is saying here? Here is what he says, two things that are really, really radical about work. The two things are work is all divine calling and work requires all of your heart.
A. Work is all a divine calling. What do I mean when I say work is all a divine calling? What you have here in this part of Ephesians, because we’ve been going through it, is it talks about relationships with a spouse then with children now with servants and so forth. This was actually typical in ancient times.
Often in the Greco-Roman world, writers would write manuals. They were called household codes, and they were manuals for the head of the estate, the father, and how you related to your spouse, how you related to your children, how you related to your servants, how you related to your business associates. It was a way of regulating your relationships.
One of the things that’s so striking, and all the scholars point this out, is when Christians wrote household codes, they actually addressed the slaves, the servants, and the pagans never addressed them. Why? Because they weren’t responsible agents. They just did what they were told, but Paul treats them like people.
Secondly, he says even though they’re domestic servants here, generally he’s writing to, even though they do so-called menial jobs, they are … He says, “Serve wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not men …” If you and I, either of us, went into a bookstore and saw a book that said Called to Serve the Lord, what would you think it was about? You’d probably think it was about somebody who left their regular job and went into ministry or mission. Right?
Do you know why you and I would probably think that? Because we don’t have a biblical view of work. That’s supposed to be a startling statement. It is a startling statement. As soon as you and I think of serving the Lord, called to serve the Lord, right away we say, “It doesn’t mean farming. It doesn’t mean pushing a broom. It doesn’t mean just accounting and adding up numbers. It means …”
No, you’re wrong, because here’s what Paul is saying. He’s talking to domestic servants. He’s talking to people who did push a broom. He said, “I don’t want you to think of this any other way. This is a calling from God. You have been called to serve God.” You say, “How could that be?”
Nobody does a better job of this than Martin Luther. If you find Martin Luther’s exposition of the Lord’s Prayer, when he gets to the place where it says to pray, “Give us this day our daily bread,” Luther says the Bible says we should pray to God, “Please feed us.” Psalm 145 says God feeds all his creatures, and when we do have bread and milk in front of us, we thank God for feeding us, but Luther says, “How did you get that bread and that milk? How did God feed you? Did he do it directly? Did it just appear?”
No, he says the farmer and the milkmaid and the people who transported it and the grocers. Oh, such menial tasks, and yet basically they are doing God’s work. God feeds us, but instead of doing it directly, he delegates it to the farmers and to the milkmaid and to the transport and to the grocer. The so-called menial people are doing God’s work, because it’s God’s work to feed us.
There’s another place where Martin Luther’s exposition of Psalm 147 is very interesting. Psalm 147:13, says, “God strengthens the bars of the gates of your city.” Cities had walls, and if you had a secure city, the bars of the gates were strong, there was good order, there was not crime, there wasn’t invasion, and so forth. God strengthens the bars of your city.
Martin Luther says that’s right. God takes care of us. It says that in the psalm. How does he do it? Does he do it directly? I wish he did. I wish he just sent angels. Wouldn’t it be great, New York City completely guarded by angels? You wouldn’t need police. You wouldn’t need laws. You wouldn’t need anything. God would just take care of everything, except Luther says that’s not how God does it.
He says what makes a city secure is good laws from good legislators. Good laws upheld by good lawyers. Security by police and military. Good governance from magistrates and managers and rulers. In other words, God takes care of us through the work of other people. All work is God’s way of meeting your needs and giving you life through the work of other people.
Therefore, all work that’s not evil, all work that actually is of help, whether it’s boring, whether it’s menial … Don’t forget he’s talking to domestic servants here. I remember Kathy and I years ago had a course. We got to know a woman named Elisabeth Elliot who was a teacher in our seminary. She used to say look at the beginning of Genesis 1:1 and 2. What do we see?
We see God bringing order out of chaos. That’s what he does. The Spirit of God moved across the waters. Darkness was on the face of the deep. Then there was light, God bringing order out of chaos. Then she says think of cleaning your house, wiping off the counters, dusting, mopping the floors. You might do it yourself, or you might pay somebody else to do it, but if nobody does that work, you’re going to die. If nobody cleans your house, you’re going to die.
When you clean your house, you’re reflecting God. You’re bringing order out of chaos. All work does. There is no menial work. There are no small people. There are no little bits of unimportant work. All work is a calling of God. All work is actually God’s work. All work is God’s way of meeting needs and bringing life to you through the work of others. Do you know what that means? If this is true, let me give you two applications.
First, in New York we are surrounded by people pushing brooms. We’re surrounded by people who are doing cleaning. We’re surrounded by doormen, concierges. We’re surrounded by drivers and people like that doing so-called simple, menial, lower-paying work. If you dare to look down at them or treat them like furniture or a piece of machinery, if you don’t treat them with dignity, you don’t have a biblical view of work. He’s talking to the domestics here.
Secondly, what if you have a job that’s kind of boring, doesn’t feel like it’s changing any life? Like I said, it’s crunching numbers or it’s doing this or it’s doing that. Go get a job that is more in line with your gifts and interests. I’m not staying you have to stay in the job, but please appreciate the work you are doing. Please see there isn’t any kind of work that isn’t God’s work.
B. Work requires all of your heart. We can be brief on this. Paul says the Bible’s understanding of work is theology, that there’s a Creator, that there’s a Sustainer, that God is providing for us, and he’s doing it … The theology is God is a Creator, and it talks about the creation and about providence. Providence means the way he upholds us, the way he provides for us. How does he do it? Through other people’s work.
Theology not only transforms your understanding of the meaning of work, it infuses all work with meaning, but it also changes your motive. It works on your heart. Why? Look at this. “Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear … Obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you, but like slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart. Serve wholeheartedly …” That word wholeheartedly means joy and zeal. “… serving the Lord …”
Here’s what this is saying. Isn’t that weird? You have an earthly boss, not the important One. Look around her or him to your heavenly Boss. Why? Some of you have bosses and work for companies that deserve a really good day’s work, and a lot of you work for bosses and companies that don’t deserve it. Therefore, some of you are doing your best, and some of you are not doing your best. That’s because we don’t have a biblical view of work.
What Paul is saying is all work is actually God’s work. I just showed you that. If that’s the case, if the core of all work is doing God’s work in the world, he’s delegated his work to you, then your real Master, your real Boss, is the One behind the earthly boss. Look at him. He always deserves a good day of work. He is your Creator. He is your Redeemer.
If you look to him, that means you’ll always be working wholeheartedly, always being productive, always doing your best, always working with excellence, and here are two interesting results. First of all, that’s liberating. Your environment won’t control you anymore. These other people can’t screw you up and mess you up. You have your dignity. You know you’re going to do a good day’s work. Why? You’re working for the real Boss. Therefore, it’s liberating, so you’re not controlled by your environment.
Mostly, what’s really ironic is it’s practical. Do you know why it’s so practical? If you actually work for your real Boss in general over the long run, the earthly bosses will be competing to get you. You know that. If you’re the kind of person who really is thinking always about God, “I want to please him. He deserves a good day of work,” you’re going to be such a good worker.
You’re going to be so steady. You’re going to be so productive. You’re going to have such integrity. You’re not going to work hard only when people are watching, and that’s going to get out. People are going to see that. What’s ironic is if you actually care more about the heavenly Boss than the earthly boss, eventually, all the earthly bosses will be falling all over themselves, trying to get you to work for them.
This is not the view of work in the Greco-Roman world. People who did menial tasks were considered just awful, scum, inconsequential. This idea of work is utterly different, and it’ll change you too. Why? I’m trying to show you my main point is the minute these people, these Christians in their culture, the minute they became Christians and thought out the implications of theology for every area of life, they became very different than the people around them. Let me show you how the same thing happens with family.


2. Jesus and your family

Under family, which is verses 1–4, it tells you something for children to do and something for parents to do. By the way, it says, “Children, obey your parents in the Lord …” Then it says, “Fathers, do not exasperate your children …” Let’s start there.
What’s interesting is obviously both father and mother are rearing the children, because it says, “Children, obey your parents …” It’s interesting that Paul actually says, “Fathers, do not exasperate your children …” It could be because Paul thinks the father is the most responsible for what happens in the family, but it could also be because he thinks fathers are more likely to do this. Speaking as a father, I think that may be true. I don’t know. I’m just speculating. It’s just a guess.
Let me show you how different this is. In ancient times fathers literally owned their children. They were their property, and they could do anything they wanted to them. They could even kill them. Therefore, in the old household codes of the pagans, they would say, “Fathers, take charge. Show them who’s boss. Take over. Be a disciplinarian. Let them know.”
The first thing Paul says, the Bible says, to parents is, “Don’t exasperate.” This is a word that means infuriate. “Don’t infuriate your children.” This is such a different approach. By the way, what it’s saying is, “Don’t make your children perpetually angry.” You say, “Well, how do you do that?” There are actually two ways of doing it. The first way, and the way we probably are thinking about is, being actually abusive, but what does that mean?
One commentator on the book of Ephesians, who knows something about the Greek word, looks at this word and says what Paul is ruling out here when he says, “Don’t infuriate your children,” is “… excessively severe discipline, unreasonably harsh demands, abuse of authority, arbitrariness, unfairness, constant nagging and condemnation, subjecting a child to humiliation, and all forms of gross insensitivity to a child’s needs and sensibilities.” All that will make your child perpetually angry over excessively severe discipline.
There’s another way to make your child always angry. Do you know what it is? Underdiscipline. Some of you knew I was going to say that. If you’re too undisciplined personally to be consistent with your children or if you’re afraid of their disapproval so you always give in, so you’re really indulging your child, you’re kind of spoiling your child, that is a perfect way to raise a child who’s always angry.
Anyone with this incredible sense of entitlement who grows up is going to be angry. Do you know why? Because when they get out into the world, they’re going to find the world is nowhere near as compliant to their wishes as you were. Overdiscipline or underdiscipline your child, and you make them perpetually angry. Don’t do that. Do you see how much is in here?
The second thing it says is not just that. It doesn’t just say, “Don’t exasperate or infuriate your children.” “… instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord.” This again is remarkable, and it is a complete departure from the culture of the time. Actually, it’s a departure from our culture. Do you know why?
Ancient culture said the purpose of parenting was to discipline the kid. “You own them. Make them shape up. Make them what you want. Discipline.” The modern family idea, modern culture, says, “The purpose of family is just to nurture the child and not impose your views on them. Let them grow up and be whoever they decide they want to be. You just nurture them. You just love them. That’s it.”
Listen. Discipline is really important, and love is really important. Paul is saying, “What is the purpose of discipline? What is the purpose of love? To teach them what is right so they can be brought up …” What does “bring up” mean? It means get to the place where they don’t need you anymore. Really mature them. Really make them self-sufficient. Make them co-adults with you. That doesn’t happen through just being firm or just loving them but teaching them what’s right.
Stanley Hauerwas put it like this. It’s pretty interesting. He says a mother or father might be wrong. They might use their authority to teach their children something misinformed, and maybe the child will grow up and decide they were wrong, but if they grow up with the notion that nothing matters in life, that is moral cowardice. The refusal to ask our children to believe as we believe, to live as we live, and to act as we act is a betrayal that comes from moral cowardice.
What the kids need more than anything else is somebody who says, “There’s right and wrong, and this is how you ought to live.” If they grow up and they say, “I liked 80 percent of what Mom and Dad said or even 50 percent or only 20 percent,” the point is they’ve learned how to grow up.
If you just love them so they decide, “I can live any way I want,” or if you just discipline them and crush them, you’re not going to bring them up. If you’re too angry at your parents because they were so flawed and they didn’t love you like you wanted or if you’re too dependent on them still, you haven’t really been brought up.
I’ll never forget a guy … It was my little church in Hopewell. During the summer he would go around to all the neighboring … There were trailers, and there were little houses. All the people who lived in them who didn’t go to our church, we would go and say, “Hey, we’re having a vacation Bible school. We’d be very happy to come over and get your child. It’s 9:00 till 12:00 noon every day for this week, and we’ll be happy to come and …” A lot of them said, “Sure,” and sent the kids and were happy about that.
I’ll never forget one guy I talked to who said, “No. I’ll tell you why. Because my father forced me to go to church, and I’m never going to have my child go to church.” He was so mad at his father that he’s being controlled by his father. He hasn’t been brought up. He’s not his own person yet. If you’re really mad at your parents or you’re overly dependent on your parents, maybe you got a lot of discipline or maybe you got a lot of love, but you weren’t taught. That’s your job with your children.
Let me just turn it around. It doesn’t just tell us something about parents. It doesn’t just say, “Parents, do this for your children.” It also says, “Children, do this for your parents.” There are actually two categories of children being mentioned here. One is, “Children, obey your parents in the Lord …” The other is, “Honor your father and mother.”
“Honor your father and mother” is in the Ten Commandments. Right? One of the Ten Commandments is, “Honor your father and mother.” The Ten Commandments do not say, “Obey your father and mother.” Do you know why? You must always honor your father and mother no matter who you are and no matter what they’re like, but you certainly don’t always have to obey your parents.
Do you know why? Even good parents, eventually, you need to stop obeying, because you need to grow up. Bad parents, who might be asking you to do wrong things, need to be disobeyed because they’re bad. The one thing you must always do is honor them. Because most of the people in this room are adult children rather than minors, let me just say do you understand the honor principle?
If your father and mother really disappointed you or if your father and mother are so important to you and you’re still dependent on their approval so you’re pretty much obeying them, you’re not hitting the balance. You’re supposed to honor them, not always obey them. You’re supposed to honor them, not hate them. Do you have it? Right down the middle of this aisle.
You say, “Why?” First of all, you need to do it for your own children’s sake. If they don’t see you at least showing respect to your parents, they’re going to have trouble in dealing with you when they grow up. Secondly, your own conscience is going to bother you if you stay angry with them. At the same time if you’re too dependent on them, then … The Bible says you’re supposed to leave your father and mother and cleave to your wife.
You say, “Well, how do I do that?” The word honor means to treat them with respect. There are a lot of ways of doing it. You’re all from different cultures, really. Find the culturally appropriate ways that make your parents feel respected and give it to them, even if you would rather not. You don’t still have to obey them. You don’t have to do everything they tell you, especially if they have a lot of bad opinions and wrong ideas, but you have to show them respect.
You need to tell them what you did get from them that was good, and you need to forgive them, because if you don’t forgive them, you’ll be saying, “I’m never going to make my …” You’re still being controlled. Maybe you’re not even speaking to your parents, but if you’re mad at them, they are still in control of you and you haven’t been brought up.
Do you now see people in those days when they read this, the attitude toward children, the attitude toward parents …? This is absolutely different than anything they had ever seen. People who read it in those days, when they saw the attitude of masters, the attitude of servants, it was completely different.
Guess what? It’s different now, is it not? The minute you become a Christian, it doesn’t just give you peace and groovy vibes in your private life. Becoming a Christian means you bring this gospel, and it affects every area of your life, but especially from the inside out. Why? What is the key to not loving your parents too much or too little, not being overdependent on them or being too angry at them?


3. Jesus and your life

I’ll tell you what the key is. What is the key to not actually overindulging your child because you’re afraid of their disapproval or maybe even overdriving your child and disciplining your child because you’re trying to live your life out through them and their success is too important to you? Do you understand what’s going on here? Until you see Jesus Christ was the true Son who lost the love of his heavenly Father so our sins could be forgiven and we could be brought into his family …
Jesus was the true Son who lost the love of his Father so we could have God as our heavenly Father. When we know he’s our heavenly Father and we know how loved we’ve been at such cost, then and only then, if God’s love is sloshing around in our soul in major proportions will we have the security not to overcontrol our child or not to undercontrol our child, not to want our parents’ approval too much or not be too bitter over the fact that they didn’t give us the approval we wanted, because we have God’s.
How do we know we have God’s? Because the ultimate Son lost the love of the ultimate Father so we could have the love of the ultimate Father so we could love our children and we could love our parents rightly. By the way, I would do the same thing for work, because Jesus is the one Master … He was the Lord who became a servant.
Why? So we could become saved, we could have our sins forgiven, so he becomes the one nonoppressive Master there is. If you are working today mainly for self-esteem, mainly for approval, mainly for power, mainly for status and not for God, mainly because you want to feel good about yourself and not for God, you’re slaves.
Your work will drive you into the ground. You’ll always be unhappy. You’ll always be frustrated. You’ll always be driven, but if you know who you are in Christ, then you work not because you’re trying to feel good about yourself or whatever. The work becomes something you just do as a delight to serve God and to serve the people around you, and you’re no longer a slave. You’re liberated.
Only when you see the ultimate Master who became a slave so you who are slaves can be free, only when you see the ultimate Son who lost his heavenly Father’s love so we who should be orphans have become children of God, now and only now can we really from the inside out live our lives in our family, live our lives in our workplace as we should. Jesus changes everything. The gospel changes everything. Let us pray.

Thank you, Father, for giving us this sort of panoramic view of big parts of our lives. It does show us Jesus changes everything. Help us to think out the implications of your gospel as we do our work and love our families. We ask that you would grant this because we ask for it through Jesus. In his name we pray, amen.







SPIRITUAL WARFARE

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 29, 2012

Ephesians 6:10–13

  10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. 11 Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes. 12 For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms. 13 Therefore put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.

  This is the Word of the Lord



The Devil. Was that a little too big a change in …? I’m not sure that was a change in subject. We’re in Ephesians, and we’re getting to this week and next week a passage on spiritual warfare. In Africa, Latin America, Asia, most places in the world, the idea of spiritual warfare, of a conflict between spiritual good and spiritual evil, is not an unusual concept.
Many people in many parts of the world think it really helps them make sense of reality, but we here in the Western world find it a foreign concept, so let’s look at this passage. This is the first part. Next week we’ll look at another section on this. We struggle. Spiritual warfare. Let’s notice whom we fight (“Our struggle is not with flesh and blood but with spiritual forces of evil”), what we fight (the Devil’s schemes), and how we fight (“Do everything”).


1. Whom we fight

You see here in verse 12, “For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil …” When Paul says this and he says, “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood …” he doesn’t mean we don’t wrestle with any flesh and blood version of evil. He’s not saying evil doesn’t take flesh-and-blood form.
He has struggled with people who imprisoned him and who flogged him and who stoned him, so he certainly opposed flesh-and-blood evil. What he is saying is we wrestle not only with flesh-and-blood evil. When evil takes flesh-and-blood form, war and cruelty and violence and greed and strife and racism and crime and poverty, he is saying they participate in something that’s above and behind and beyond that is more than merely human and natural. The flesh and blood behind it is something that’s not flesh and blood.
Until you recognize that dimension of evil in the world, you will not be able to understand its depth and its pervasiveness and its intractability. That’s what he’s saying. Here in the modern Western world, we have trouble with that, because the modern Western mindset is everything has a natural cause. Therefore, everything has a scientific explanation. If everything has a natural cause and a scientific explanation, then crime and violence and greed and racism and war and cruelty must have a natural cause.
What is that natural cause then? We say it’s bad psychological factors, “You were not raised right. You weren’t educated right,” or bad sociological factors, bad social systems. We say, “There has to be a natural cause to all this. We can figure it out, and we can fix it.” That’s the Western mindset, but it’s wearing thin.
Andrew Delbanco, a great intellectual scholar type who’s at Columbia University, some years ago wrote a book called The Death of Satan. Even though he says in the book, “I’m a secular liberal,” he wrote a book called The Death of Satan, and the first line in the book is this. He says, “A gulf has opened up in our culture between the visibility of evil and the intellectual resources available for coping with it.”
Then he goes on and says something like, “We’ve jettisoned in the West the idea of cosmic evil or transcendent evil or supernatural evil. We don’t believe in that. In fact, we don’t even like to use the word evil, and the reason we don’t like it is because it implies value judgments and moral absolutes, so we use medical terms. We talk about dysfunction. We talk about pathology. We don’t use moral terminology.”
Delbanco essentially says, “As the twentieth century has gone on, it has gotten harder and harder to say holocausts and ethnic cleansing and serial killing are just bad psychological and sociological adjustment.” In his book, Delbanco turns to a very famous interaction. It’s in the book The Silence of the Lambs. Of course, it was also depicted in the movie, The Silence of the Lambs. It’s the place where the young policewoman, Officer Starling, goes to meet for the first time the monstrous serial killer, Hannibal Lecter.
She goes to the cell, and she’s looking at him and hearing what he has done and says, “What happened to him to make him so twisted? What happened to him that he could be so cruel?” He heard her. Big mistake, Starling. He begins to speak, and it’s very hard to read this without hearing Anthony Hopkins, I know.
She says, “What happened to him to make him so twisted?” Lecter responds, “Nothing happened to me, Officer Starling. I happened. You can’t reduce me to a set of influences. You’ve given up good and evil for behaviorism, Officer Starling. You have everyone in moral dignity pants. Nothing is ever anybody’s fault. Look at me. Can you stand to say I’m evil?”
Delbanco, who’s quoting this, says modern people, the modern West, cannot answer the monster’s question, and he’s right. He says, and I paraphrase, “As the twentieth century has gone on, what we said 100 or 150 years ago, that all evil has natural causes, scientific causes, psychological, social causes, is wearing thin.”
One of the things we used to say is racism and violence come from a lack of education, a lack of civilization, a lack of culture. It’s only primitive, uncivilized, uneducated people who are like that. Then we had World War II. Then we had the Final Solution and the Holocaust and the death camps that arose out of perhaps as educated and as cultured a nation as there was on the face of the earth.
Then we had Marxism, and Marxism says, “The reason for all the problem is not psychological or educational. It’s social. We have to put the means of production in the hands of the proletariat, not in the hands of the capitalists,” but they did. Of course, the proletariat was every bit as oppressive and violent as the capitalists were. Now Marxism has been thrown into the dustbin of history basically.
Over and over again, everything that says, “It’s psychological. It’s social,” Delbanco says we cannot today in the West account for the depth and pervasiveness of evil, but the Bible doesn’t have that problem. The Bible says here’s where evil came from. It came from the free will of two races of beings God created: angels and humans.
Some of the angels fell by exercising their free will and turning away from God. The fallen angels, the Devil and his demons, are personal, supernatural beings. On the other hand, we have the human race, and we turned. Now sin and evil are in our hearts. They are deep in our souls, which are still spiritual roots.
Therefore, here’s what Christianity says. “Yes, psychological and sociological factors can aggravate. They can accentuate and they can shape the innate self-centeredness, the innate self-absorption, the innate blindness and self-delusion, the innate radical insecurity in the human heart, but those factors don’t create it.” That stuff that’s in the heart, aggravated by the Devil, is what makes the world the way it is.
Let me just push this home to you. There is a Devil. There are demons. You need to see that. I know there have to be people listening to me or who will listen to this recording who have a lot of trouble with the idea that there’s a personal Devil or believing in a personal Devil, believing in what the Bible says. Let me suggest four things to you really quickly.
First, if you struggle believing in the Devil, would you please at least consider you’re being simplistic? New Yorkers want to be sophisticated. New Yorkers want to be nuanced and sophisticated, not crude and unsophisticated. Is it possible perhaps by not realizing the multi-dimensionality and the spiritual depth dimension to human evil, you are being simplistic and you are being naïve and not the people who believe in the demons, that they’re not being the unsophisticated, crude ones but you are?
Here’s a second point. If you struggle with believing in a person Devil, consider you might be culturally narrow, because white Western people have a lot of trouble believing in the Devil. That’s not true of most people in the world. Africa, Latin America, Asia have no trouble believing in spirits and demons and things like that.
They have wisdom too, don’t they? Are you really going to just look down at all that wisdom? Why not be open culturally to what other cultures tell you about this? To paraphrase Shakespeare, “There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in your psychologies and sociologies.”
Here’s a third idea you have to think of if you struggle with the idea that there’s a real, personal Devil. Do you believe in God? You say, “Oh, yeah, I believe in God.” If you believe in God, isn’t it a little inconsistent if you believe in good, personal, supernatural beings why there couldn’t be bad, personal, supernatural beings?
Here’s the main thing I want to say. If the Bible is true, if the Bible is right about this, and it is, then you will not be able to understand, let alone defeat, on your own the darkness in your own heart, in your family, in the city, in the world. It’s beyond you. We’re in over our heads unless God is helping us. It’s not going to just take psychology and sociology.


2. What we fight

What we fight is actually listed there. “… the devil’s schemes.” Let’s spend some time on this. The word schemes sometimes is called wiles. It’s a word that means … The Greek word is methodeia, method, but it’s a word that means strategies. The Devil, therefore, must have an arsenal of weapons, or the Devil must have a portfolio of various strategies he throws at us.
It’s very interesting. There’s a place in 2 Corinthians 2:11, that says, “Do not be unaware of the Devil’s devices.” “Do not be ignorant of his devices,” the old King James says. What is that? Obviously, the Devil has devices. We have to fight them. There are two errors we must fight that the Devil wants us to fall into and two sets of strategies we must fight that he throws.
A. The two errors. The two errors are actually inferred. You can infer them from the balance of what Paul is saying to us about the demons and the Devil. On the one hand, he doesn’t want us to overestimate. On the other hand, he doesn’t want us to underestimate their power. For example, he doesn’t want us to underestimate the power.
It says, “Our struggle is not against flesh and blood …” The word struggle there is not the normal word for struggle. It’s a word that actually means wrestling with your bare hands on the ground. If you’re shooting arrows at somebody, that’s a battle, and if you’re fighting them with a sword, that’s a battle, but when you get to the place where you’re on the ground, wrestling with your enemy with your bare hands, that’s the most desperate life-and-death, close moment, and that’s the word Paul deliberately chooses to talk about the spiritual warfare.
Look at the words he uses. Why doesn’t he just say demons? Instead he says, “… the rulers … the authorities … the powers of this dark world … spiritual forces of evil …” He’s trying to show us how formidable they are. He’s just racking up these impressive words. He’s trying to show us, “Do not underestimate them.”
On the other hand, he actually says, “Don’t overestimate them. Be strong in the Lord,” meaning, “Don’t be afraid. Don’t run. Don’t be cowardly.” Then he says at the end, “For when the evil day comes and you’ve put on the full armor of God and you’ve done everything I’m telling you to do, you will stand.” He doesn’t say you might stand. He says you will stand. Expect success.
Some of you have heard this. C.S. Lewis, in the introduction to his book, The Screwtape Letters, says there are two equal and opposite errors you can fall into with regard to demons and the demonic. What are those two opposite errors? They’re the ones Paul is trying to help us avoid. On the one hand, you can overestimate their strength. You can have what C.S. Lewis calls an unhealthy interest in them or ascribe all evil to them or ascribe too much power to them.
On the other hand, to disbelieve in them, to not believe in them at all … One you could call superstition. One you could call substition. One is overbelief. One is underbelief. Lewis ends his little quote by saying, “They themselves [the devils] are equally pleased by both errors and hail a materialist or a magician with the same delight.”
Why are both these errors bad? I’ll tell you why. Because they reduce evil, and the key to fighting successfully all the things that are against us, all the spiritual forces, is to actually have a nuanced and complexified understanding of evil. If you say, “Oh, everything is the Devil” or “There’s nothing the Devil,” you’ve reduced things, and you have a simplistic understanding of what goes wrong.
I often refer to this. I don’t know how often. If you’ve been around, you’ve heard me refer to it before. Some years ago I read a sermon by Richard Baxter who was a seventeenth-century, British Puritan minister in the 1600s. He wrote a book on melancholy, which, of course, is an old word for depression. He was a very good pastor, and he knew how to work with people.
This sermon says what are the possible causes of depression, melancholy? He named four. First, he says it could be your depression is caused by the physical. It might have a physical cause, in which case what you need is medicine or food or rest. It could be something to do with your body.
Secondly, he says there might be a psychological cause. You might be cast down in your temperament. What you need then is a lot of love and affirmation and just support. Thirdly, he says there might be a moral cause. You might feel guilty about something, or you might be angry at something and maybe feel guilty about being that angry and you need repentance and you need forgiveness and you need reconciliation.
Lastly, he says there could be a demonic cause, which we’re getting to here. Or, there could be more than one, and they could be kind of interactive. I challenge you to find anywhere hardly that level of nuance and balance, because almost everybody falls into one of the two errors C.S. Lewis talks about, one of the two errors Paul is trying to avoid.
On the one hand, let’s face it. You have a lot of Christians today who actually attribute so much to the Devil. If you have a problem, if you have a temper problem, if you have an anger problem, for example, it’s the Devil. We have to do something about it. Wait a minute. What about the way you were raised? What about the bad psychology in you because of a bad family background? What about your physiology? What about there’s something wrong with you chemically? “No, it’s all the Devil.”
Maybe you’re angry because you’re refusing to forgive somebody, and that’s a moral issue and not a demonic issue. On the one hand, you have believers, you have Christians, who are attributing too much. Weirdly enough, they would be upset to hear that, but they’re like magicians, according to Lewis. In other words, everything is magical. Everything is occult. Everything is demonic.
On the other hand, you have what we have mainly in New York, and that is we don’t believe in it at all. We give up on the whole thing. The whole idea is kind of silly. Both errors equally please the devils. They hail both with equal delight. Why? Because you’re really not able to see all they’re throwing at you, all life is throwing at you.
You can see most people, if you’re discouraged, depressed, there’s a super-spiritual approach. It’s all the Devil. There’s an under-spiritual approach. You just give a person medicine. It’s the psychological and the physical. It’s never the moral or the demonic. Oh my goodness, but Richard Baxter was biblical. Paul is being biblical. Are you being conformed to one of these errors? Stay out of those two errors. They are part of the method. They are part of his devices.
B. The two categories of lies. Do you know the word devil here? “Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes.” There are two words usually used to talk about the Devil. This is probably the most common one. It’s the Greek word diabolos, and you say, “Oh, yeah, I know that word. Diabolical,” but maybe you don’t. The word diabolos is the noun form of a verb, and the verb means to lie and slander.
You need to understand this. You need to get away from the error … We are too skeptical. That is, here in the West we don’t think the Devil is ever involved unless the person’s head is completely turning around, they’re turning green, and they’re vomiting. Then maybe that is the Devil, perhaps, because the Devil got in there somehow. The main way the Devil works is he’s a liar. The word devil means a liar. It also means a slanderer.
John White, a Christian counselor, wrote a book years ago and said here’s how the Devil works. Take a piano and open up the top and sing a note into it. Whatever string your voice is attuned to … Most of us don’t have perfect pitch, so we have no idea what note we’re actually singing, but you can find out. Open up the top of the piano, sing a note in, and a particular string will vibrate. It’s the string that’s attuned to your voice. You haven’t even touched it. You haven’t touched the key, and yet it’s vibrating to your voice.
That’s what the Devil does. The Devil cannot make a good person bad. The Devil makes a flawed person worse. The Devil plays on what’s already in you. He aggravates what’s already in you through lies. That’s the reason why, for example, it says in Ephesians 4, “Don’t let the sun go down on your anger. Don’t give the Devil that kind of foothold.” If you’re bitter, that gives him the ability to aggravate and press you and push you. You’ve given him a foothold.
It says in 1 Timothy, “Don’t put a young man into the eldership, because he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the snare of the Devil.” Pride helps you fall into the snare of the Devil. There are two ways in which Satan’s lies … He says things to you. It doesn’t necessarily mean he literally says things to you, that you actually hear a voice, “Who’s that?”
Rather, what he does is he stimulates talk that goes on in your heart, and there are two basic categories of those according to the Bible: temptation and accusation. By the way, from here to the end, you might get inspired, but I’m actually here to instruct and convict, so I want you to listen. I’m going to be as specific as I can in the next five minutes.
Temptation essentially gets you to have too high a view of yourself so you go and do things you shouldn’t. Accusation is the Devil’s way of trying to get you to have too low and self-hating a view of yourself so you’ll go and do things you shouldn’t. Both ways work. In temptation Satan is actually hiding God’s holiness from you and how much he hates sin. He hides that from you and plays up the love. In accusation he hides God’s love from you. He plays up God’s holiness and his wrath on sin, and he hides God’s love.
That’s the reason why John Newton, who was a very good pastor, was writing to a young man who was a Christian and who was very depressed and he was under accusation, because he was saying, “Oh, I’m so awful. God can’t love me.” John Newton knew he was under accusation, so he wrote, “You cannot be too aware of all your inward and inbred sins, but you may be, indeed you are, improperly affected by them.”
Here’s his main point. “You express not only a low opinion of yourself, which is right, but too low an opinion of the person, work, and promises of the Redeemer; which is certainly wrong.” You say, “How does this work exactly?” Temptations and accusations are basically lies, things Satan leads you to think in certain ways and moves you to do what’s wrong, one through too high a view of yourself, too low a view of yourself, too low a view of God’s holiness and too high a view of his love, too low a view of his love and too high a view of his holiness.
How do those lies work? If you get a book by Thomas Brooks, also a seventeenth-century Puritan, a contemporary of Richard Baxter, he wrote a book called Precious Remedies Against Satan’s Devices. He has 50 or 60 or 70, but what I have done is I’ve chosen just a few from the temptation category and just a few from the accusation category just to give you the sense of how this works.
For example, he says, “How does Satan tempt us?” Here are eight devices. I’ll give you the device, and then I’ll sometimes give you the self-talk you might be saying to yourself. The first device is he shows you the bait and hides the hook, which means he gets you to look at the short-term pleasures of what this would do and hide from yourself the long-term misery of what will happen. Come on. You know that one.
Here’s the second one, by getting you to rationalize sin as virtue. “I’m not really greedy. I’m just thrifty. I’m not really nosy. I’m just concerned. I’m not an alcoholic. I’m just sociable.” Thirdly, by showing you the sins of Christian leaders, so you say to yourself, “He did it too. Nobody is really that pure.”
Fourthly, by overstressing the mercy of God, so what you say to yourself is, “Do it. God will forgive you. That’s his job.” Fifthly, by making them bitter over suffering, so what you say is, “I’ve suffered. I deserve this.” By the way, do you want to know one of the reasons powerful, prominent men are always having these affairs? Because what they say to themselves is, “Nobody knows how hard I work and how many sacrifices I make, so I deserve this.” That’s temptation.
Here’s another one, by showing Christians how many bad people seem to be having great lives, and so the self-talk goes like, “I might as well do it. Playing by the rules doesn’t pay off.” I’ll just give you one more. The seventh one is by getting you to compare one part of your life to another. “Look, I’m very good over here. I do all that. It’s okay that I do that.” In fact, do you want an extreme form of that? Mafia hit men. “I’m good to my mother. Okay, I kill people, but I’m really, really good to my mother.” That’s not a joke, by the way.
What about accusation? Here are four from the accusation arsenal. How does Satan accuse us? By causing us to look more at our sin than at our Savior. By the way, all the parenting books will tell you if you give your child one compliment for every one criticism, if you give your child one criticism for every one compliment, that kid is going to grow up hating themselves. You need to give four or five compliments for every criticism, because the criticisms really lodge and the compliments don’t.
There are reasons for that. The biblical reasons for that are we know there’s something wrong with us, so you have to have a lot more compliments than criticisms. In the same way what Thomas Brooks says is for every one look at your sin, you need to take five looks at your Savior, and the Devil makes sure that doesn’t happen.
Secondly, by causing Christians to obsess over past sins that have done damage that can’t be undone. Thirdly, by making Christians think the troubles they’re going through must be punishment, so you say, “This wouldn’t have happened unless God was mad at me.” Fourthly, by making people think Christians couldn’t possibly have the inner struggles and feelings they have, so you say, “If I were a real Christian, I wouldn’t be having these thoughts and desires.”
Do recognize any of these? He’s playing you. He knows what strings you have, and he’s vibrating them. You must not be unaware of his schemes. You must understand what he’s out there doing. That’s what we’re fighting, the schemes of the Devil.


3. How we fight

You say, “Boy, you haven’t left much time.” No, I haven’t, and it’s partly because of the little bit of artificiality. We’ve broken the part of the text on spiritual warfare into two section. This section basically gives you the problem, and next week the full armor of God, what that is, brings you the solution.
I can tell you two things. The good thing about the fact that I don’t have that much time and most of this is next week is it forces me to be concise right here, and that’s helpful to everybody. I’d like to tell you two things you must do if you are going to fight successfully all these things that are being thrown at you.
The one is know what particular devices Satan uses on you. I will never forget the first time I read Thomas Brooks’ Precious Remedies Against Satan’s Devices. He has all of these devices, and basically, they’re forms of self-talk, little things you say to yourself in your heart on your way into doing something wrong.
I’ll never forget how surprised I was. I remember three of them were things I used to always say to myself, and they always led to disaster. I just finally got rid of them. I said I’ll never say that to myself anymore. When I start to think that, I say, “That’s a dead end. Forget that. Disaster will happen now.”
So I no longer go there, and I realized basically Satan has stopped trying those out because I had gotten wise to them. Then I found three more. He’s not stupid. He moves around. He says, “Okay, they got wise to me on those three. Fine. I won’t go there anymore.” Do you know which ones he’s using on you? Do you know which yours are? He knows what your strings are. Do you know what your strings are? Do you know where you give him openings?
The second principle is the gospel is the armor. Do you know why? Come on. Let’s do some theology here. What are the two things he does? Temptation and accusation. He either gives you an overblown sense of God’s holiness and minimizes his love so you hate yourself or he gives you an overblown sense of God’s love and plays down the holiness so you go do things you shouldn’t do and think everything is going to be okay and it’s a disaster.
He turns you into someone who either is crushed by a sense of your guilt or doesn’t have enough of sense of guilt at all. If you believe you’re saved by living a good life, if you believe what all the other religions say and that is basically, “I will find God. I will self-actualize. I will be saved if I do these things,” if you really believe through your efforts and through your achievements and through your performance you can save yourself, then you will either sometimes feel like a sinner, “Oh, I’ve failed,” or you sometimes feel loved and accepted because you feel like you’ve succeeded.
If you believe the gospel that Jesus Christ died for you on the cross as your substitute, that he took the penalty for your sins so when you believe in him all of your guilt is put on him and absorbed there and all of his righteousness and all of his record is brought to you so you’re loved and accepted in him, then that means every Christian walks around with those two facts in their mind at the same time.
“I am a sinner. In myself I am lost, and my sin was so great nothing less than the death of the Son of God could save me. My sin was so bad God had to do that. Jesus had to do that. On the other hand, I’m absolutely loved. I’m completely accepted. I’m as loved now as I will be 4 billion years from now. He sees me in Jesus Christ.”
Do you know what that is? One of those facts completely demolishes temptation. If you understand the gospel, you know the thing you’re tempted to do, Jesus Christ died so you wouldn’t do that. Jesus Christ was ripped from limb to limb because of this. How can you have anything to do with it?
On the other hand, when you’re being accused, the other fact completely demolishes that strategy of Satan, because you are absolutely loved and accepted. It’s the gospel. You put on the gospel, and it completely defeats the strategies of Satan. Let me just give you one example of the kind of talk you have to …
What it means to put on the gospel … If you’re accused, if you’re feeling too guilty, if you’re feeling like, “I’ll never be what I should be,” if you’re feeling like a failure, if you’re feeling God can’t love you, other people can’t love you, if you’re down on yourself, this is what Thomas Brooks said. I’ll close with this.
Thomas Brooks, who was a wonderful, wonderful pastor, said something like this to people who were under accusation. He said, “The remedy against this is to look upon all your sins as charged upon the account of Christ. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of us peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
You know the wife who said to the bill collector, ‘If I owe you anything, go to my husband.’ So may the believer say to justice or to the Devil, ‘If I owe you anything, go to my Christ who has underwritten me fully.’ I must not sit down discouraged under the fear of those debts which Christ to the uttermost farthing has fully satisfied. The remedy against this accusation is to solemnly consider believers must repent for their being discouraged by their sins.
It springs from the refusal of the richness, freeness, fullness, and everlastingness of God’s love and from the refusal of the power, glory, sufficiency, and efficacy of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ and from the refusal of the worth, glory, fullness, largeness, and completeness of the righteousness of Christ given to you by faith. God did not give a believer a new heart for it to be rent and torn in pieces by discouragement.”
What is that? That’s putting on the armor and now standing. Do you know how to put on the armor? Do you know how to handle the things that are being thrown at you? We wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with the gospel we can stand. Let us pray.

Our Father, we thank you for giving us everything we need to fight the fights that are in front of us. Lord, we know it’s not just the Devil. There’s evil in us. That’s the flesh. There’s evil outside of us. That’s the world. There’s evil above us. That’s the Devil. We know things are complex. We can never blame everything on the Devil. Oh my goodness, no, but we recognize the multidimensionality of sin. We recognize the spiritual dimension of it.

We will not make the same mistake our whole civilization has made for the last century of underestimating the power of evil and seeing we wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but in Jesus Christ you disarmed the principalities and power when you died on the cross. As the book of Revelation said, we triumph over the accuser with the blood of the Lamb.

We pray, Lord, that you would teach us how to do that. Everybody in this room needs to find the ways in which devices are being used against them and to use the gospel in the peculiar and particular ways they need to. Give them that wisdom, for we ask it through Jesus. In his name we pray, amen.







HOW TO BE STRONG

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—February 5, 2012

Ephesians 6:14–24

  14 Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place, 15 and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace. 16 In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one. 17 Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
  18 And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints. 19 Pray also for me, that whenever I open my mouth, words may be given me so that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel, 20 for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it fearlessly, as I should.
  21 Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing. 22 I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you. 23 Peace to the brothers, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.

  This is the Word of the Lord



We’ve been looking at the book of Ephesians for quite a long time. This week and last week we come to the last section of it, and it’s all about spiritual warfare. It’s about the Devil. It’s about conflict between the supernatural forces of good and the supernatural forces of evil. One of the problems with a two-parter, and I feel the frustration of it today, is you can’t do a recapitulation. In other words, we don’t have the time to lay some of the groundwork I did last week.
For example, if you’re here in the middle of New York City, to say there really actually is a personal Devil is a little scandalous. Last week I made my case why I think it’s immanently sensible, but I can’t remake it. Instead, we have to proceed to the last part of this passage. The first part last week talked about Satan’s weapons and strategies. This week it talks about our part, the Christian’s weapons and strategies, in this warfare.
You might have heard what I said last week. The best book I know that has ever been written on Satan’s strategies and weapons is Thomas Brooks’ Precious Remedies Against Satan’s Devices, a book written in the 1600s, an English pastor, seventeenth century. In spite of the fact that it’s so old, I was informed this week you can download it for $0.99 as an eBook. I’m not sure just how modernized the language is, so it may not be easy to read.
On the other hand, the best book ever written on the Christian’s weapons and strategies was written also by a seventeenth-century English pastor named William Gurnall. It’s called The Christian in Complete Armour, and it’s an exposition of Ephesians 6:10–18, eight verses, that’s 1,200 pages long. I don’t think it’s available for $0.99. I think it might actually break your Kindle if you try to download it. I don’t know.
The reason why I mention these, and I don’t usually highlight books quite as prominently as I have here … Do you remember last week we mentioned C.S. Lewis says there are two equal and opposite mistakes you can fall into with regard to demons? You can have an unhealthy interest in them. You can attribute too much to them. You can see them behind everything and ascribe evil to them that’s beyond what they can do or what they do. On the other hand, you could be totally skeptical and not believe in them at all.
I have to tell you if you’re going to read books on this subject, almost the whole world breaks into these two mistakes now, because either people don’t believe in the Devil at all or else they understand the Devil in terms of … They think the Devil and demons express themselves through paranormal manifestations, exorcist stuff, and the way to deal with the Devil is through exorcism.
If you go to these men who reflected a long time on the Bible and on their own experience and as pastors on the experience of other people and if you go through the Bible, go all the way back to Genesis 3, what do you see Satan doing in the very beginning with Adam and Eve? He’s not possessing them. He’s lying to them. One of these two, I forget if it’s Thomas Brooks or William Gurnall, says Satan doesn’t leave fang marks on your flesh; he leaves lies in your heart. He’s a liar.
On the basis of that understanding, we’re going to proceed, and we’re going to look at what in verse 11 and verse 13 is called the full armor of God. If you want to defeat the forces of evil, if you want to be successful in the battles of life, you must put on the full armor of God. What is that? Here’s what we’re going to learn: when to put it on, what it is, how to put it on, and whom to remember when you do.


1. When to put the armor on

Why would we even bring that up? In the English it says, “Stand firm then …” which means the battle is going. “Stand firm” is something you say to a soldier when the battle is going. “… with the belt of truth buckled around your waist …” It actually says, “Having been buckled.” “… with the breastplate of righteousness in place …”
The verbs through here refer to a single past action that’s complete. In other words, this is the metaphor. You don’t put your armor on if you’re a soldier in the middle of the battle. You don’t wait for the onset before you say, “I guess I’d better get on my shield and my breastplate.” You don’t have the arrows coming down at you and you say, “Gosh, I’d better go find my shield. Where did I put that thing?”
You put your armor on before the battle starts. Why is that important? It’s very important. If things are going okay in your life, if you don’t feel like there are any battles going on, for example, there are no great disappointments or failures in your life, so you aren’t being tempted to despair, or there’s no persecution or major criticism or attacks so you’re not tempted to anger and resentment or there are no seductive settings, in other words, if you don’t feel there are any real battles going on, you spiritually coast.
That’s what we do. When circumstances are good, we just coast. That means we don’t have much of a prayer life. We don’t work on our understanding of the Scripture. It’s very superficial. We have relatively light involvement with the church, and you’re not working on deep change in your life. You’re not working on deep spiritual growth. When things are going well, you’re busy, and when you do religious activities, when you do come to church, when you do read, you’re looking for inspiration and guidance, but then the arrows appear in the middle of the air.
We’re talking about old warfare. Now the arrows are on their way, they have flame on them, and you don’t have your armor on, because when things go bad and you suddenly have a struggle, all of a sudden you’re in church every week, all of a sudden you’re praying every day. You’re trying to read your Bible, but it’s too late, because as we’re going to see what they’re talking about here, the fortification of your soul, the armoring of your soul takes time, and you can’t do it like that.
How are you going to make sure your armor is on? How are you going to make sure you’re ready for the troubles that are going to show up? Here’s what you have to do. You have to realize even though things are going well in your life, you need to look at every single day … look at tomorrow, every single day … as a testing ground, because there actually are skirmishes going on, and there really are opportunities for you to become battle ready.
We have a tendency to say, “Oh, yeah, I understand this idea of spiritual battle when the big things come.” Do you realize there are little skirmishes happening, and we’re losing them every day, because we haven’t learned to put our armor on? What do I mean? For example, let me give you two temptations that happen almost every day, and most of us are just giving into them. We’re losing the battle.
One is impatience with people. Every day you have people who just irritate you and that you’re impatient with. The other one is worry. Do you remember? I told you the whole idea of Satan doesn’t leave fang marks on the flesh; he leaves lies in the heart. You have to look at the thoughts of the heart if you want to see where the battlefield is.
When somebody is irritating you and you’re just so irritated and you’re so impatient, listen to the thoughts of your heart. Do you know what it’s saying? You’re saying things to yourself like, “Imbecile. Idiot. No wonder she … No wonder he … Oh my God …” What are you going to do about that?
What if you started talking and changing the thoughts of your heart and said, “Lord, I wonder what I look like to you. I’ll bet you I look at stupid as this. I bet you I look a lot worse than this, and yet you are patient with me. In the garden of Gethsemane you asked people to just stay with you and stay awake with you, they fell asleep, and you still died for them. You are so patient with us. If you’re that patient with me, I can be patient with her. I can be patient with him”?
Do you do that? No, you don’t. I don’t either. In other words, I just let my heart go and say, “Idiot. Stupid.” What ends up happening is you lose. You become a little harder that day, a little more proud. You’ve lost the battle. It’s a skirmish. That’s all it is. You had an opportunity to put the armor on. You had an opportunity to recognize the thoughts of your heart and to change them.
What about worry? You’re worried. You’re anxious. When you’re anxious, you’re thinking something. You’re saying, “This has to happen. Oh my gosh, this has to happen. It’s not happening.” Get ahold of yourself and say, “Lord, I realize my worry is really a form of pride.” Do you know why? It’s pride because worry basically means, “I know exactly how the day ought to go, and I’m afraid God is not going to get it right.” How do I know how the day ought to go? “I’m sorry, Lord. It’s such a relief to say you know what’s best.”
You can either ignore the thoughts of your heart … The thoughts of your heart are saying, “This has to happen, and God doesn’t know what he’s doing.” You don’t even realize it. The thoughts of your heart are saying, “This person is an idiot. What an imbecile! No wonder …” Because you’re letting your heart go in that direction, you’re grumpy. You’re unhappy. You become more of an anxious person every day. You become more of a proud person, more of a hard person. You’ve lost the battle.
Those are skirmishes. Do you recognize them as such? Do you know how to listen to the thoughts of your heart and to recognize the theological assumptions underneath them and deconstruct them and do something about them? That’s spiritual warfare, not exorcism, though that’s sometimes necessary, but that’s not routine spiritual warfare. Every single day there are skirmishes. You could be putting on your battle armor so when the big battle comes you’re ready, but we’re not. That’s when to put it on, before the battle gets here.


2. What the armor is

What does it mean to put on the full armor of God? What the heck does that mean? Here’s what it means. What is the armor? “Take the helmet of salvation. Take the breastplate of righteousness. Take the shoes of the gospel of peace.” Wait a minute. He’s talking to Christians. These are people who already have salvation. They already have the righteousness of Christ. They already have the peace of the gospel, yet he’s telling them to put them on. What’s going on here?
What Paul is doing is he’s saying, “I want you to take what’s true of you, and I want you to appropriate it as a helmet, as a breastplate, as a shield.” What Paul is saying here is not identical, but it’s something like Ephesians 3. In Ephesians 3, if you have been with us through all this, Paul prays for the Ephesians, that Christ would dwell in their hearts by faith and they would know the love of Christ.
Everybody immediately who’s reading that thoughtfully says, “Wait a minute. He’s talking to Christians.” In fact, Paul says all Christians by definition have Christ living in them, and all Christians by definition know Christ loves them. What’s Paul praying for? Here’s what he’s praying for.
He is praying what is objectively and externally true of Christians would become internally and subjectively true of them. He says, “I don’t want you to just know about Christ’s love. I want you to actually experience it in the heart and have that joy,” and that’s about prayer. I don’t want to go any further than that. This is not identical, but it’s similar to what he’s saying here.
He’s saying, “I know you’re saved. I know you have faith. I know you have the righteousness of Christ. I know you have the peace that comes from the gospel, but you’re not using them. You’re not appropriating them. You’re not actually putting them on in order to fight the battles of life.” What does it mean?
What he means is, “I want you to put them on,” which is another way of saying, “I want you to take them into the very center of your heart so you don’t just know in your head that you are accepted and loved by God through Christ at infinite cost. I want you to so take it on into yourself and so drill it in that when you’re criticized or when you fail you internally, instinctively think, feel, and act as an infinitely loved and safe person.”
To put on the armor of God means to take the things that are objectively true of you as a Christian, the privileges and positions of being a Christian, to take what’s externally and objectively true and so drill it into your heart that without having to tell yourself you instinctively, reflexively respond as a loved person, as an accepted person, as a safe person.
In other words, putting on the armor of God is taking what’s true of you, the privileges in the gospel, and putting them into your heart and creating new habits of the heart. New reflexes, new dispositions of the soul. What does that look like? That comes to our third point.


3. How to put the armor on

There are seven items listed here if you include prayer as one of the items. There is the belt of truth, the breastplate of righteousness, the shoes of the gospel of peace, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, the sword of the Word, and then he says pray in the Spirit. That’s not part of the metaphor of armor, but if you count that, Paul speaks of seven items.
I want you to see they’re not exactly parallel. In fact, I think after many years of thinking about this, many sermons on it, and unfortunately, many, many hundreds of pages read about it, I think it’s best to break these into three categories. The first of the seven is put on the belt of truth, and I believe this is the foundation for all the others. This is the foundation principle, and all the other things are applications.
Actually, the reason I believe that is that if you understand what this word means, it literally was the foundation. Belt is not a very good … We don’t have a good translation. The Greek word that’s used here actually means a leather sheath. It was a thick thing. It went over the whole body. It came all the way down practically to the knee, which means it actually protected the thighs from swords and arrows, and it was underneath all the other armor.
In other words, it was something like a slip, except I just ruined the whole … Forgive me. We’re talking about blood and guts and veins in my teeth, and stuff like that. Essentially, it was like a slip under a dress. It actually was a thick leather sheath underneath all of the other armor, so it’s the foundation for everything.
I think what Paul is getting across in the metaphor is everything else it talks about … It talks about righteousness. It talks about peace. It talks about these various things, which are specific privileges we have in Christ, but the foundation is you must learn how to do what Colossians 3:16 describes. “Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly …” Bring these things into your center.
If you want an example of it, I can think of no better example than Luke 8. It’s the story of Jesus Christ and his disciples in a boat on the sea in a storm. You know the story. It’s told in a number of different Gospels. Jesus is asleep, and the disciples are in the boat. Suddenly, a storm comes up. It’s very, very sudden and very, very violent. They are so scared, and they’re panicking. They run over to him. Maybe they shake him, and I like the old King James. They say, “Master, carest thou not that we perish?”
“Don’t you care, Master? You don’t even care. You don’t love us. We’re going to die. How can you be there sleeping?” Jesus gets up, rebukes the storm, and then rebukes them. He stills the storm and then turns to them and says, “Where is your faith?” The reason I’ve always been amazed at that is he does not say to them, “You need more faith.” He says, “Where is your faith? Get it out. It ought to be here. You weren’t putting it into practice.”
Here’s what he means. “How dare you say I don’t care about when you’ve already seen how much I’ve done? What in the world makes you think when I’ve shown you my power and when I’ve told you about my relationship with you, if you know who I am and if you know the relationship I have and you’ve seen a lot of evidences of my power, you’ve seen a lot of evidences of my love, why were you panicking?
I’ll tell you why you were panicking. You believe these things. If I asked you, you’d get it right on a test. Who is Jesus? Who am I? Does he love us? Does he have power? Your heart instinctively is not shaped by that truth. Your instincts were to panic. Your instincts were to say, ‘He doesn’t care. I’m going to die.’ ”
He says, “Where is your faith? Take the things you know and believe and put them in there so the next time automatically, reflexively you act as an infinitely loved and safe person.” That’s putting on the armor. Putting on the armor is, above everything else, learning to take the truth. It’s the foundation to everything else. It’s learning to take the truth, and it’s working it in like that.
Let’s take a look at the other armor just for a minute to give you just a couple of examples. First, take a look at the next pairing: breastplate and the shoes of the gospel of peace. The breastplate and the shoes were very important for routine operations. You’re going out on the battlefield, and you have to make sure you can move fast. That’s why the shoes are important. They also have to grip well, so you have to be able to be surefooted. You might need to suddenly hike over certain terrain.
You need the breastplate on there because it’s the one thing you cannot handle. You can take an arrow in a lot of different parts of the body, but you can’t take an arrow to the heart. So it protects your heart. Those two pieces of armor, I would say, work with routine operations, but the other, the helmet and the shield, are when arrows are coming. “You can quench the flaming arrows of the Evil One.”
Here’s what I think this means. On the one hand, it means when you just walk around during the day you need to be watching what your heart says because that’s the field of satanic lies. Basically, the reason why this is called the armor of God is it’s not the same as willpower.
You may know, “I don’t want to do these things because if I do these things bad things are going to happen to me.” There’s a way to be a good person through willpower, gritting your teeth. That’s not what this is. That’s mechanical. That’s will only. That’s basically not really dealing with your whole person.
If you want to deal with the whole person, here’s how you really are. The thoughts of your heart lead to the feelings of your heart, which lead to the actions of your will. Therefore, if you want to get control of your actions and get control of your feelings, you have to get control of your thoughts.
The thoughts of the heart are things Satan is always trying to put lies and false beliefs in. Instead of just saying, “I’m just going to grit my teeth. I’m not going to do it,” why do you want to do it? Why are you tempted? Why are there problems? Why are you angry? Why are you despairing? Why are you seduced? Find out what your heart is saying.
If your heart is saying, “Oh, I can do it. I know it’s wrong, but God will forgive me,” you need to say, “Hey, what about Hebrews 3:13, where it says you get hardened by the deceitfulness of sin?” You say, “I’ll go ahead and do it, then I’ll just repent, and God will forgive me.” How do you know you’re going to want to repent?
Sin is the suicidal action of the will against itself. Every time you do something wrong, it makes it harder for you to resist doing it again. It makes it harder for you to even want not to do it again. You’re arguing with yourself. You’re talking to yourself. You’re doing what the psalmists did in Psalm 103 and Psalm 42.
Psalm 103 says, “Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits …” “I’m forgetting his benefits. Remember, soul, his benefits. Yes, that’s what I have to do.” Do you know how to do that kind of warfare, or do you just drift? Do you just coast? The breastplate of righteousness is reminding you who you are in Christ. The gospel of peace is reminding you of the joy you have in Christ.
The helmet of salvation is probably the assurance. In other words, these are all different ways of taking things you have in the gospel … If I had the time, in fact, I could easily take a couple of weeks on every single one of these items and go down deep, but are you getting the picture? The last two items mentioned, where it says, “Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and pray in the Spirit,” are different again, in a different category.
The belt of truth is the foundation. It’s learning how to put the Word into your heart to create new instincts. The other bits of armor are particular privileges and aspects of the gospel you’re supposed to be reminding yourself about, relishing, drilling in, thinking about, and using on your heart to deal with the lies and with the false beliefs that are in there.
How do you actually do that practically? It says, “Take … the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.” Some people say, “That’s repetitious. Isn’t that the same as the belt of truth?” No, I don’t think so. The belt of truth is the basic principle. Now we’re talking about the Bible itself. “And pray in the Spirit …” Bible and prayer. Why did I say that?
You can’t get more basic than this. At the individual level, how well are you doing? Do you know how to read the Word? Are you memorizing it? Are you meditating on it? Are you praying? What kind of prayer life do you have? The next level is spiritual friendship. Whom do you have who is holding you accountable for the kind of life you ought to live?
Whom do you have that you’re praying with? Whom do you have with whom you’re talking about the Bible? Bible and prayer, individual level; Bible and prayer, group level; and Bible and prayer; church level. You can’t do without the church. You can’t do without … You have Bible and prayer at this level.
You have the preaching of the Word. That’s the preaching of the Word. It’s not the only way you need the Word, the Bible, but it’s one of the ways you have to have it. The sacraments are another form of prayer, except it’s a means of grace. That’s how you put the armor on. What is putting the armor on? It’s creating new dispositions by taking the truth, working it into your life and working it into your heart to create new instincts, reflexes.


4. Whom to remember when you put the armor on

It’s really important as you’re doing all this to remember somebody. A lot of people get nervous about all this talk of Christians and spiritual warfare against the forces of darkness. “Onward, Christian soldiers, marching as to war, with the cross of Jesus going on before.”
A lot of people shudder at that. In a way they should. That’s a hymn, by the way, we actually don’t sing here, and it’s partly because how easy it is to take all that out of context, how easy it is to take this out of context. You can’t understand a verse unless you take it in context of the whole book, and you can’t understand a book unless you take it in the context of the whole Bible.
Let me give you the context of the whole Bible with regard to this spiritual warfare. In the Old Testament God is said to be a divine warrior. When they cross the Red Sea and they get out of Egypt and God liberates the children of Israel from slavery, Miriam, Moses’ sister, sings a great song and says, “God is a divine warrior, and he fights against evil and injustice. He has liberated us, and he has won the great battle of the Red Sea.”
As the history of Israel goes on, it gets clearer to see when Israel becomes evil, when Israel becomes corrupt, when Israel becomes oppressive, God goes to war against them. He fights against them, which shows God is not a tribal deity. He’s against evil, whoever does it. He’s against injustice, whoever does it.
By the end of the Old Testament, the prophets, because the Jews were now again under the boot of the oppressor, under the Romans, they were yearning for a time when the divine Warrior would show up the way he did and led them out of Egypt and liberated them, that some divine warrior would show up and liberate them from the Romans.
Then comes Jesus, and he calls himself the Son of Man. The Son of Man was a figure mentioned in Daniel 7, who would lead the hosts of the Lord, the armies of God, to defeat evil on the earth. When Jesus shows up and he says he’s the Son of Man, all the disciples said, “Wow! Finally, we have the divine Warrior here. He’s going to fight against evil and injustice.”
He doesn’t act that way, does he? He doesn’t wound; he heals. He doesn’t raise an army; he wanders about teaching and feeding and loving people. At the climax of his life when the soldiers are after him, Peter gets out his sword, and Jesus says, “Put it away.” What kind of divine warrior is this?
The answer is the only kind we need, because if Jesus had come back to put down the Romans, that wouldn’t have changed the human condition. Right? Secondly, if Jesus had come back to destroy all evil, none of us would’ve been left, because evil is in us. We’re the problem. What did he do?
Jesus Christ did not come with a sword in his hands; he came with nails in his hands. He didn’t come to bring the sword of God’s judgment on evil. He came to bear the sword of God’s judgment on evil. It fell on him. Yes, Jesus Christ overcame evil with good. He gave himself. He died on the cross for our sins so he could not just end the Roman Empire but to end sin and death and evil itself.
He did that by forgiving his enemies and saving his enemies and dying for his enemies so someday he can come and end all evil without ending us. That’s the battle. That’s the warfare we should be participating in. Why? Look carefully. Jesus Christ loved his enemies. That’s how he overcame evil. He forgave his enemies.
That’s how he overcame evil. He died for his enemies. That’s how he overcame evil, and so should you. In other words, the only person you should really hate is Satan. You should be aggressive toward Satan. You should be assertive toward Satan. It doesn’t say you’re supposed to choose other human beings.
In fact, let me point this out. If you hate humans, if you are vengeful and angry toward humans, if you say, “Those are the bad people,” and you go and you try to hurt them, Satan wins, because if they’re doing evil to you and you just do evil back and you become angry and bitter and vengeful, the evil’s poison spreads into you. You become hard. You become part of the vehicle for spreading it all around.
Don’t you see? If you hate Satan and if you battle against Satan, you win over evil. If you hate people and you battle against people and you fail to forgive people and you’re not gracious to people even when you’re pursuing justice in this world, Satan wins. Fight like Jesus. Overcome evil with good. Die and forgive your enemies because, actually, here’s Christian warfare.

  For not with swords loud clashing,
  nor roll of stirring drums;
  with deeds of love and mercy
  the heavenly kingdom comes.

Let’s pray.

Our Father, we thank you that you’ve made it possible for us to hear the Word and pray as a body in the assembly of your people. We ask that, Lord, right now you would help us to put a little bit more of that armor on, that we would develop deeper habits of the heart that would help us stand firm and on the evil day to stand. Teach us how to overcome the temptations and accusations of Satan. Teach us how to fight the good fight, not by fighting other people but by fighting, really, the forces of darkness and doing it the way Jesus did. It’s in his name that we pray, amen.







OUT OF EGYPT

Savior and Teacher—A Study of Matthew—February 19, 2012

Matthew 2:13–23

  13 When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. “Get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him.” 14 So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night and left for Egypt, 15 where he stayed until the death of Herod. And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
  16 When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. 17 Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled: 18 “A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her childrenand refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
  19 After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt 20 and said, “Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who were trying to take the child’s life are dead.” 21 So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
  22 But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee, 23 and he went and lived in a town called Nazareth. So was fulfilled what was said through the prophets, that he would be called a Nazarene.

  This is the Word of the Lord



Now every year in these weeks leading up to Easter, Christians around the world for centuries have pondered the life and death of Jesus. We’re doing that by looking at incidents in Jesus’ life through the book of Matthew. We’re taking texts each week from the book of Matthew. Last week, we looked at his birth. That’s when God became human. It’s called the incarnation.
This week, we look at a text that tells us another account out of Christ’s childhood, actually his infancy. It’s unique to the book of Matthew. It’s extremely well known, so well known that we didn’t even have to read the first part. The first 12 verses are very familiar. Wise men, sages, the magi from Eastern lands come to Jerusalem when Jesus is in infancy still in Bethlehem. They come, they go to Jerusalem, and they go before King Herod, the political king. They say, “We are looking for the Messiah, King of the Jews, who has been born, we believe.”
Herod is very disturbed. He gets his own scribes to say the Messiah is prophesied to be born in Bethlehem. Herod says, “Go to Bethlehem and find him. If you find him, tell me so I can come and worship him.” Herod, of course, wants to kill him. The wise men find Christ, but in verse 12, right before the passage you just heard read, God warns them in a dream not to go home to Herod. They go home another way.
Herod, realizing he has been tricked, slaughters all children under the age of 2 in Bethlehem, which would have been about 20 or 30 children, from what we know of the population of the time, but Joseph has been warned by God and goes to Egypt. There was a huge expatriate Jewish community in Alexandria, Egypt, actually, over 1 million. It was huge. Anybody who had political problems who was Jewish would go there.
When Herod dies, even though Joseph would like to go back to Judea, he is nervous about that because Herod the Great’s son is there. So he goes to Galilee and goes to Nazareth. So what? Why is this here? It’s important to remember that every one of the gospel writers, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, had an enormous amount of material to use, and they are very selective.
When they choose to tell us something out of the life of Jesus, it’s for two reasons. One is it happened, but two is it’s revealing. It reveals something about who Jesus really is and what he came to do and what his message and ministry was. So what does this account or this incident in the life of Jesus Christ tell us about Jesus himself? It tells us three things. He is the object of the hate, he is the agent of the grace, and he is the climax of the plan.


1. He is the object of the hate

It’s pretty obvious to see that Herod the Great, in his violent reaction, is hostile to Jesus Christ. This is not just a one-off incident. In the book of Luke, by the way, in the very beginning of Luke when Jesus is a child, Luke tells a completely different incident that gets across the same basic idea. It’s very clear that the gospel writers want us to know this.
Remember old Simeon sees Jesus in the temple when he is being brought by Mary and Joseph for circumcision? The Holy Spirit comes on him, and he gets a revelation. He says, “This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against … And a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
So even in the beginning of Luke, here’s the teaching: Christ evokes hostility. He evokes hatred. He is offensive. Now why would that be? For two reasons. These two go together. These two things put together are the reason why Jesus Christ, when rightly understood, who he is and what he is claiming, evokes such hostility.
First, the claims. Now you can see it. We didn’t read it. If you go to the beginning of chapter 2 of Matthew, this is what verse 1 says: “… Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, ‘Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews?’ […] When King Herod heard this he was disturbed.” Yes. Why was Herod disturbed? Because Herod is the king. So if you’re king and you want to stay king and you hear there’s a king coming, you get disturbed. That’s the principle.
If you think that claim about Jesus was enough to evoke hatred, later on as Jesus grows up and begins to make his own claims, they’re even more offensive. They bring about even more fury, because look at what he says. Jesus does not say, “Tell me your needs, and I will meet them,” nor does he even really say, “Give me your philosophical questions, and I will answer them.”
What he actually says is not, “I have the truth,” but, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. All truth resides in me.” He doesn’t just say, “I can show you the way to escape death or to get divine life.” He says,” I am the resurrection and the life. I can destroy death. I in myself have this kind of power.”
Jesus makes these astonishing claims, but basically what they are is claims of sovereignty over you and me. He doesn’t just claim to be King of the Jews; he claims to be King of every single human being on the face of the earth. Look at what he says. He says, “Unless you are willing to take up your cross and deny yourself, you cannot be my disciple. Unless you hate your father and mother, and even your own life, you cannot be my disciple.”
People say, “What in the world does that mean?” What it means is, “Your love for me and your allegiance for me should be greater than any other allegiance. You should be quite willing to die for me. You should be willing to pluck your eye out for me. Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not the things I say?’ ” He is claiming to have absolute, unconditional authority over you, and he is demanding absolute, unconditional allegiance to himself. Therefore, there’s the claim.
John Stott, very famously in his book, Basic Christianity, says, “Once you hear Jesus’ claims, you are forced to extremes.” This isn’t a direct quote, but Stott says something like, “No one who ever really understood what Jesus said did anything other than three things. There are only three possible responses. You either run away from him in fear, you attack him in anger, or you kneel and bow in complete surrender.” Terror, anger, or complete surrender. No other responses have any humanity to them. No other responses have any other intellectual integrity to them.
Yet every Christmas, you can go through stores and malls and things like that. While people are walking around blithely just listening to “Joy to the world, the Lord has come; let earth receive her King,” That got a bunch of children killed, because Herod understood it. People constantly tried to stone Jesus Christ because people understood what he was saying. People walk through the mall. “Let earth receive her King.” Don’t you understand what it means? No, because if you did, the natural enmity of the human heart against all claims of sovereignty over it would rise up.
Secondly, there is something in the human heart that resents those claims. Do you know what it is? Basically, put it this way. In every single person in this room, including me, in my heart and in your heart, there’s a little King Herod, because deep inside, you want to be the captain of your own fate. You want to be the captain of your own soul, the master of your own fate. Every human being wants that.
That’s the reason why the Bible says we’re not just indifferent to God. Romans 8:7 says, “The natural mind, the natural heart of human beings, is hatred toward God.” To the degree you understand what God asks, to the degree you understand who Jesus really is, you will see that hostility. It’s there. Now let’s apply point one. That is to say, what does that mean? If this is true (and it is), that rightly understood Jesus Christ’s claims bring about hostility, anger, and hatred when they come in contact with the human heart, then here are three practical implications.
First, you must have an extreme reaction to Jesus. Do you react extremely to Jesus Christ? In other words, where are you? Somebody out there is saying, “What are you saying? Are you saying you want me to be scared of Jesus or angry at Jesus?” Yes. Not as good as bowing the knee to Jesus, but way better than where almost everybody is.
The only way you can have a tepid response to Jesus, you can sort of like him or kind of believe in him or really wish you were a better Christian … If you play that, “I’m a Christian, but I really wish I was a better Christian,” or, “I really believe in him,” if you are in that gray zone which shows you’re not thinking and maybe you’re not feeling, it lacks humanity. It lacks intellectual integrity.
Please, I would rather you got off the dime and were afraid of him or angry at him because that’s closer to kneeling to him because at least you’re seeing what he says. If your response is not extreme, if it’s the tepid, if it’s in the middle, I urge you to come to grips with who he is by just starting to read the Gospels or reading good books that will guide you through the Gospels.
Secondly, you must take into consideration the residual hostility of your heart to God if you are a Christian. Now I know you know the great thing about being a Christian is you’re reconciled to God. Romans 5 says there is now peace between us. There was this hostility, but there’s peace. He has forgiven us, and we’re reconciled to him. You still have a heart that has residual anger and hostility to God. It’s still there. Not until we get to the very end and we’re glorified and we have our perfect bodies and our perfect souls … It’s still there.
You need to take that into consideration. Why do you think it’s so hard to pray? Why do you think it’s so hard just to concentrate on it? Why do you think he answers a prayer, you feel like, “I’ll never forget this, Lord. I’ll never forget this,” and just a week later you are forgetting it? How many times have you said, “I will never do this again,” and two weeks later you do it again? Why? Romans 7. Paul says, “… I do the very thing I hate.” There’s still a little King Herod inside you. Do you not know it?
So that means you really have to be way more intentional about Christian growth, about prayer, about accountability to other people to overcome your bad habits. You can’t just glide through Christianity. There’s still something in you. There’s still a King Herod, and you have to take that into consideration.
Thirdly, you must know you are not objective. If you don’t know what you believe about Christianity (I’ll take my life in my hands here because I’m in New York City), please don’t think you’re objective. You can’t be objective. Aldous Huxley later in his life was doing some sort of autobiographical stuff in a book called Ends and Means. He says something so intriguing. He basically says when he was in college, “I realize I didn’t want there to be a God. I wanted atheism to be true. I wanted life to be meaningless because then I could do whatever I wanted.” He admits it.
Thomas Nagel, philosopher, prominent down here at NYU, now retired I believe, in one of his books says something astoundingly honest. He says belief in God makes people nervous. It’s the fear of religion. “In speaking of the fear of religion, I don’t mean to refer to the entirely reasonable hostility [he has, by the way] toward established religion and religious institutions, in virtue of their objectionable moral doctrine, social policies, and political influence.” In other words, he says, “I don’t like church. I don’t like a lot of religion. I have a right to do …”
Then he says, “I am talking instead of something much deeper [in all of us]—namely, the fear of religion itself. I speak from experience, being strongly subject to this fear myself. I want atheism to be true, and I am made uneasy by the fact that some of the most intelligent and well-informed people I know are religious believers.
It isn’t just that I don’t believe in God and, naturally, hope that I’m right in my belief. It’s that I hope there is no God! I don’t want there to be a God; I don’t want the universe to be like that. My guess is that this cosmic authority problem is not … rare … I am curious … whether there is anyone who is genuinely indifferent as to whether there is a God.”
This cosmic authority problem is not rare. He knows the little King Herod in his own heart. He says, “Nobody is objective. How are you going to look objectively at the Bible when you know if it’s true, you lose control of your life? How could you be objective about that? You can’t be.” Don’t think you’re objective if you don’t believe in Christianity. Take that into consideration. Question your doubts.


2. He is the agent of grace

The second wonderful thing about this passage is Mary and Joseph and Jesus end up in Nazareth. It’s amazing. Did you notice … Look carefully. Even though Joseph and Mary were from Galilee, notice they try to go back to Judea. They want to go back to Jerusalem.
When Herod the Great dies in verse 21, “So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus [Herod’s son] was reigning in Judea in place of his father …” He went to Israel to Judea, but when he heard Herod’s son was there, he got nervous and “… was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he [went back] to Galilee and [settled in Nazareth where they were from].”
Now why was it that he was trying to go to Judea and he didn’t want to go to Nazareth or Galilee? The answer you can find in John 1, where Philip has met Jesus and is very impressed with him. He goes to his friend, Nathanael, and says to Nathanael, “Nathanael, I think we may have found the Messiah.” Nathanael says, “Where is he from?” Philip says, “From Nazareth.” Nathanael says, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?”
Now everybody in Judea look down their noses at Galileans because they were considered hicks from the sticks. So everybody in Judea looked down their noses at Galilee. That’s the reason Joseph wanted to go to Judea. He wanted to come up in the world. Well, of course, the Galileans felt very put upon. When you know there are people looking down at you, what are you going to do? Find somebody else to look down at.
So people inside Galilee, in parts of Galilee, looked down their noses at people who were not in other parts of Galilee. So people like Nathanael, who actually lived in Cana, looked down upon anyone from Nazareth. Now I have no idea why, but the point was Nazareth was the most backwoods, the most backwater, the most Nowhereville place of all. That’s how God works.
In this world, it’s pecking order, right? Ivies look down at the non-Ivies. That’s obvious. Certain businesses and people with certain sized bonuses look down at others. Did you see that article about the young woman who through a YouTube video now has a modeling career? Did you see that was in the New York Times this week? Front page article? You might say the powers in the fashion world look down at her. She has such obvious good looks. One person says, “She has the kind of face any woman could have if they really want it.” Nazareth. She is from Nazareth.
Do you remember that movie from the 80s, Wall Street, with Michael Douglas as the tycoon, Charlie Sheen as this young, upcoming analyst, and Daryl Hannah as the girlfriend of Michael Douglas? At one point, Charlie Sheen is looking at this piece of artwork on Michael Douglas’ wall. Daryl Hannah says, “It cost him $400,000.” Charlie Sheen says, “$400,000?” This was 1987 or something like that. “Wow. That’s enough to buy a beach house.” Daryl Hannah looks at him and says, “Sure, in Wildwood, New Jersey.” Nazareth.
Now the point is God does not operate like that, and nobody who has anything to do with God should operate like that. God’s approach to salvation is completely, utterly, absolutely the opposite. In ancient times, when the oldest son always got all the wealth and the second or younger sons got nothing, they had no social status, how does God work? Through Abel, not Cain. Through Isaac, not Ishmael. Through Jacob, not Esau. Through Ephraim, not Manasseh. Through David, not his older brothers.
At a time in which women who couldn’t have children were disgraced, God could have brought his saviors into the world, his deliverers into the world, through all kinds of women. He always chooses the woman who is unloved, the woman who is ashamed. He chooses old Sarah, not young Hagar. He chooses Leah, who Jacob doesn’t love, not Rachel. He chooses Rebecca, who can’t have children, Hannah, who can’t have children. Samson’s mother can’t have children. Elizabeth, John the Baptist’s mother, can’t have children.
Why? Over and over and over again, God says, “I will choose Nazareth, not Jerusalem. I will choose the girl nobody wants. I will choose the boy everybody has forgotten.” Why? Is it just that God likes underdogs? How moving. Isn’t that moving? No. He is telling us something about salvation itself.
Every other religion, every other moral philosophy … You’re going to see a whole lot of books now by agnostics and atheists saying, “Even if we don’t believe in God, we still need to have some way of bringing people together and giving them moral values and all that stuff.” Every philosophy, every religion is going to say, “Here’s how we can be saved,” however they define salvation. “Here’s how we can be saved. Summon up all of your strength, and live like this.”
Jesus Christ comes and says, “You’ll never do it. You’ll never do that. I have come not to show you how to summon up your strength so you can find God; I have come as God to find you. Therefore, I’m going to save you. I’m going to save you through what I do, not what you do. I’m going to save you by grace.”
This means all other religions appeal to the strong, the people who can pull it together, the people who can summon up the blood. Only in Christianity Jesus says, “I’ve come for the weak. I’ve come for those who admit they’re weak.” Therefore, it’s not nuts. That’s what Christmas is all about, you know.

  Seek not in courts or palaces;
  Nor royal curtains draw;
  But search the stable, see your God
  Extended on the straw.

Now how do we end and apply this point? Like this.
First, God works through the lowly, not the powerful. I don’t care who you are. I don’t care what you’ve done. I don’t care what your background is. I don’t care what deep, dark secrets are in your past. I don’t care what shameful things you may have ever done. In New York City, just to be mediocre is considered to be a failure. I don’t care how you feel.
God saves and works through anybodies and even nobodies rather than somebodies. What that means is there’s hope. It’s freeing. We’re all sinners saved by grace. It doesn’t matter who you are or what you’ve done. Jesus’ arms are open wide. He went to Nazareth to say that. There are a lot of other ways he says it.
Secondly, our worldly status should be left out of Christian community. We do live in New York City, and therefore, there are a lot of people of influence, a lot of smart people, a lot of talented people. We have to be very careful, really careful, because not only this text but all through the Bible, we’re being told race, pedigree, wealth, status … When you come in the doors and we come together, we come together in the Christian community in the church, we have to leave things outside as markers.
In here, it’s your identity in Christ, the fruit of the Spirit, and your service to him. You have to leave those things outside. They should not rule us. Those distinctions out in the world mean everything. Everything. That’s where all the hubris comes from, all the disdain, all the sarcasm … Wildwood, New Jersey. A face any woman could have. That has to be in every way left out of our community.


3. He is the climax of the plan

There is something that happens in this text that only the most diligent will discover. When Matthew goes through and he is telling about the story of Jesus, he constantly quotes the Old Testament. He does it twice in this passage. Up here in verse 14, he says Jesus and Joseph and Mary went to Egypt. Then they came out of Egypt after they were in Egypt in exile for a while. They came out back to Judea and to Galilee. “And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet: ‘Out of Egypt I called my son.’ ”
Of course, if you have a Bible, there will probably be a little superscript thing there and a footnote that says this is Hosea 11:1. Now some of you are the more fastidious types. You actually look up those passages. You say, “Oh really? Hosea 11:1.” You go to Hosea 11:1 to read it, right? Not many of you; just a few elite, super-spiritual, slightly uptight people who look up everything.
If you do that and you go there, you will be very confused because when you go back, you will see it’s not a prophecy at all. In fact, in the Old Testament, the Lord calls his people Israel corporately my son, just like he also sometimes calls them his bride. The metaphor is he is the Lord. He is the husband, and his people are his bride. He is the father, and the people are his son.
When you go back there, all Hosea is doing is he is talking about the exile and the deliverance from exile of Israel. Israel was in Egypt. Moses led them out to Canaan. That’s what it is talking about. Yet Matthew can look at something that happened to Israel and say, “It’s fulfilled in Christ.”
Now you say, “Well, that’s kind of high theology.” Well, it’s more than high theology. There are two ways to read the Bible. One is it’s a set of stories about what you must do, sort of a set of Aesop’s Fables, a set of stories that say, “Here’s Abraham. He was tested. He failed. Don’t fail like him,” or, “He came through. Come through like him.” It’s a set of Aesop’s Fables. If you read the Bible like that, it will crush you.
Mark Twain had a recurring nightmare in which he is lying in bed, and this huge Bible is on his chest pressing down and crushing and suffocating him. Anyone who reads the Bible has a set of stories you must emulate. Basically the Bible is about you, what you must do, how you have to live in order to have God bless you. It will crush you.
There is another way to do it. Yes, David fought Goliath. Good for him. Yes, Adam was thrown out of the garden. Bad for him. Yes, Abraham did some good things (good for him) and bad things (bad for him). So there are a bunch of stories, except when we get to the New Testament. If you start up to look up the references, you will see that the New Testament writers say Jesus Christ is the true Israel. He is the true Adam. He is the true Moses. He is the true David.
In other words, the Old Testament is not just a set of stories about how you ought to live; it’s a plan of salvation Jesus Christ fulfilled. He is the true Israel. That is to say he is the one person who did everything God asked Adam and Abraham and Moses and David and Israel to do, the Ten Commandments, the tabernacle, the sacrifices. He asked them to do all these things.
Nobody ever did them except Jesus Christ, who now is the ultimate sacrifice for sin when he died on the cross. He is the ultimate Prophet. He is the ultimate Priest. He is the ultimate King. He does everything we should have done for us so when we believe in him, we’re saved. He dies on the cross. He gets the curse we deserve. When we believe in him, we get the blessing he deserves.
Now some years ago, I was lecturing at a seminary trying to say, “Everything in the Bible is about Jesus.” In the end, you have to leave telling people not just, “Live like this,” but, “In Christ, you’ve been saved even though you can’t live like this. Now once you know, once you have that joy and gratitude and know God loves you, you actually have a new incentive to start trying to live like this.” Do you have that? Somebody said, “Explain it.” So this is what I read them.
“Jesus is the true and better Adam who passed the test in the garden [the garden of Gethsemane] and whose obedience is imputed to us. Jesus is the true and better Abel who, though innocently slain, has blood now that cries out for our acquittal, not our condemnation. Jesus is the true and better Abraham who answered the call of God to leave all the comfortable and familiar and go into the void ‘not knowing whither he went!’ to create a new people of God.
Jesus is the true and better Isaac who was not just offered up by his father on the mount but was truly sacrificed for us all. While God said to Abraham, ‘Now I know you love me because you did not withhold your son, your only son whom you love, from me,’ now we can say to God, ‘Now we know you love us, because you did not withhold your son, your only son, whom you love, from us.’
Jesus is the true and better Jacob who wrestled and took the blow of justice we deserved, so we, like Jacob, only receive the wounds of grace to wake us up and discipline us. Jesus is the true and better Joseph who, at the right hand of the king, forgives those who betrayed and sold him and uses his new power to save them.
Jesus is the true and better Moses who stands in the gap between the people and the Lord and who mediates a new covenant. Jesus is the true and better Job, the truly innocent sufferer, who then intercedes for and saves his stupid friends. Jesus is the true and better David, whose victory becomes his people’s victory, though they never lifted a stone to accomplish it themselves.
Jesus is the true and better Esther who didn’t just risk losing an earthly palace but lost the ultimate and heavenly one, who didn’t just risk his life, but gave his life to save his people. Jesus is the true and better Jonah who was cast out into the storm so that we could be brought in. Jesus is the true and better Rock of Moses who, struck with the rod of God’s justice, now gives us water in the desert.
He is … the real Passover Lamb—innocent, perfect, helpless, slain so the angel of death will pass over us. He is the true temple, the true prophet, the true priest, the true king, the true sacrifice, the Lamb, the Light, the Bread. The Bible is not about you—it is about him.” Let’s pray.

Our Father, we are so grateful that in spite of our hostility, your Son came and died for us to show us that salvation is by grace. He comes and he fulfills all of our obligations so we can rest in that. Now we pray that you would help us to work out the implications of that. Make us a community in which the world’s distinctions, pride, condescension, and prejudice are gone.

Help us also to give ourselves completely to you, absolute bowing-the-knee surrender. Forgive our tepidness. Forgive our lukewarmness. Make us hissingly hot in love with you and willing to live for you. Give us the joy that should come in the hearts of any people who know these things are true. We pray all this in Jesus’ name, amen.







HEALING THE SICK

Savior and Teacher: A Study of Matthew—March 4, 2012

Matthew 8:5–17

  5 When Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking for help. 6 “Lord,” he said, “my servant lies at home paralyzed, and in terrible suffering.” 7 Jesus said to him, “I will go and heal him.”
  8 The centurion replied, “Lord, I do not deserve to have you come under my roof. But just say the word, and my servant will be healed. 9 For I myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘Come,’ and he comes. I say to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
  10 When Jesus heard this, he was astonished and said to those following him, “I tell you the truth, I have not found anyone in Israel with such great faith. 11 I say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. 12 But the subjects of the kingdom will be thrown outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
  13 Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! It will be done just as you believed it would.” And his servant was healed at that very hour. 14 When Jesus came into Peter’s house, he saw Peter’s mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever. 15 He touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to wait on him.
  16 When evening came, many who were demon-possessed were brought to him, and he drove out the spirits with a word and healed all the sick. 17 This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: “He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases.”

  The Word of the Lord



In these weeks up to Easter we’re looking at the life of Jesus through the gospel of Matthew. When you look at the life of Jesus you are always struck, if you ever read through it, by the number of his miracles. What I’ve done is chosen a fairly generic passage. In fact, there’s a healing just before in 8:1–4, there is the healing of a centurion servant, there are healings afterwards, and there are many other healings in the book of Matthew.
What I want to do just briefly today is to give you what I would call a high-level way of understanding the miracles of Christ, because if you don’t understand the miracles of Christ you don’t understand him. The reason it’s important to talk about it is the only other people we know with supernatural, miraculous power are fictional figures. They’re either figures in ancient legends or modern fiction.
In ancient legends, Merlin. In modern fiction, superheroes … Superman. They have non-natural powers. The have supernatural powers. But I want to show you in the stories of the world, the supernatural, miraculous powers always work in a completely different way than they work in Jesus’ life, and that tells us a lot about Jesus. Jesus’ miracles are proof, pointer, and pattern. They are part of the proof of who he is, they’re a pointer to where he wants to take the world, and they’re a deep pattern of how he comes to save us.


1. Jesus’ miracles are part of the proof of who he is

You see (not just here) at the very end, in verse 17, the miracles fulfill some Old Testament prophecies about the Messiah. Over and over you’ll see places in the Bible where it says, “He did this and he did this, and his disciples believed in him.” Therefore, obviously, one of the reasons Jesus does these great miracles is to show the world he’s the divine Son of God, to show his greatness.
The centurion here, interestingly enough, tells us a little bit about how great he must be, because the centurion says, “I am a man under authority.” What he means by that is, “I have been given a certain number of soldiers. Inside the sphere of authority I have been given, my word is law.” In other words, “I have absolute power inside my sphere of authority. I say something and they do it.”
But then he says, “So you don’t even need to come to my home.” What is he saying? He is saying, “The whole world is the sphere of your authority.” The centurion knows Jesus isn’t a miracle worker who has to get in the room and say, “Abracadabra,” and do all the stuff you see in legends. The whole world is the sphere of his authority. The centurion says, “All you have to do is say it. All you have to do is think it, and he will be healed.” So the miracles are a way of showing us part of the evidence of who he is.
Now, I need to do a little sidebar. I have to, because when I was first coming on as a Christian (quite a while ago, in the 60s and 70s), one of the very main reasons many people said Jesus can’t be real and these things must be legends is because of the miracles. On my college campus, one of the main reasons people couldn’t believe in Christianity they said was because MCH … Miracles Can’t Happen.
Are you aware of the fact that things have changed? That is not as big an objection as it used to be. In fact, one of the ways we found that out was I did a Question and Answer time. I used to do Question and Answer times after the morning and evening services. We had two services over at Hunter College.
I remember one time when I was preaching on John 6 and Jesus feeding the 5,000, and I said, “If you believe miracles can’t happen (MCH) I want to see you right after the service. I’m ready for you. I’m loaded for you. I want to talk to you about this.” I was all ready, and very few people came. This was like 1997. In fact, the only people who came were men over the age of 45, and I began to realize there was a certain kind of person who still felt miracles cannot happen. But for various reasons, that’s a minority opinion in the world today. Do you know that?
If you feel like miracles can’t happen, you might be a little bit irritated by my saying so, but it’s a fact. There are a couple of reasons why. Here are two possible positions for you if you say miracles can’t happen. First, you can either say, “I believe in God, and miracles can’t happen.” Wait a minute. That’s a non sequitur. If there’s a God, it would be perfectly reasonable to believe in miracles. How could miracles not happen if there’s a God?
“Okay,” you say, “I don’t believe in God, and miracles cannot happen.” Okay, but let me be a little mischievous here. You have heard of quantum mechanics and chaos theory, which say now (in the last 20–30 years) we’ve learned that at the atomic and subatomic levels the so-called laws of nature we think are iron-clad laws don’t work. Therefore, the universe is much more open than we think. In other words, if there is no God anything can happen. Anything has happened. How can you say you don’t believe in miracles?
Here’s my point. To say miracles cannot happen is a leap of faith. It’s a dogmatic, a priori assumption, and I don’t want you to be so dogmatic you can’t stand back and see the real evidence for the reality and truth of Christianity is the full portrait of Jesus. How did this centurion know Jesus could do this? He had never seen Jesus work like this. How did he know? Jesus is even astonished.
The point is he had been contemplating. He had been looking at the totality. He had been looking at Jesus’ claims of deity. He had been looking at Jesus’ life. He had been looking at the way he deals with people. He had been looking at the power of Jesus and the sweetness of Jesus. He’d come to the conclusion, “This must be the Son of God,” and that is the most compelling argument for Christianity. It is to look at every part of who Jesus is and to say, “How could all this come together in one person?”
A friend of mine, Dick Lucas, once talked to a skeptic who said, “If I had a watertight argument for the existence of God I’d believe.” He came back and said, “What if God didn’t give us a watertight argument for his existence but a watertight person, Jesus Christ, against whom in the end there can be no argument?” What he means by that is the sum total of everything about Jesus, including his miracles, is compelling evidence he really is the Son of God. Don’t let a dogmatic leap of faith keep you from at least considering and contemplating the totality of who he is.


2. Jesus’ miracles are a pointer to where he wants to take the world

Let’s again contrast Jesus’ supernatural, miraculous power with some of the figures we know. Jesus’ power cannot only be a demonstration of his power. Why? If so, he would do things like Merlin and Superman. Here’s what Superman can do. He says, “You don’t believe I’m Superman? Watch. I’ll blow the top of that mountain off with my x-ray vision,” and you’ll say, “Yo, you really are Superman.”
But you never see Jesus doing stuff like that. You never see him blowing the tops off of mountains or things like that (which would be perfectly fine). Why doesn’t he do that? Because the miracles are not simply naked displays of power pointing to him. They’re actually pointing to where he wants the world to go. Essentially all Jesus’ miracles deal with the suffering of the human race.
I’m paraphrasing, but B.B. Warfield, a biblical scholar, says, “The number of the miracles Jesus Christ did may easily be underrated. It has been said that, in effect, he banished disease and death from Palestine for three years. If this is exaggeration, it is pardonable exaggeration. For wherever he went he brought a blessing. We greatly underestimate his beneficent activity as he went about feeding the hungry, healing the sick and the blind and deaf, liberating the oppressed, raising the dead, and as Luke said, going everywhere, doing good.”
Jesus’ miracles were not just naked displays of power. They were dealing with human suffering. That means they pointed. Where? They point back (way back) and ahead (way ahead). Do you realize where they’re pointing? They’re pointing way back to the way the world was when God first made it, the way the world was when it was the way God wanted it to be.
When he feeds the hungry, he’s pointing us back to a time in which there were no little children with swollen bellies dying of starvation. When he heals the sick and the leper and raises the dead, he’s pointing back to a world in which there was no suffering, disease, or death. When he stills the storm, he’s pointing to a time in which nature was our friend, not our enemy, and we weren’t always dying because of blizzards, avalanches, earthquakes, and tsunamis.
He’s pointing back to the way the world was before sin and our turning away from God, the true ruler of the world, broke everything apart. Therefore (as we’ve said before), you must understand Jesus’ miracles are not primarily suspensions of natural laws. They are the restoration of natural law! Death, decay, and suffering are suspensions of God’s original natural order, and Jesus Christ in his miracles is putting it back, at least temporarily. That’s why one theologian essentially says, “Jesus’ healings are the only natural thing in a world that is unnatural, demonic, and wounded.”
Then, of course, Jesus’ miracles are not just pointing way back. They’re pointing way ahead. He even mentions the messianic feast. Verse 11 says, “I say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob …” He’s talking about something the Old Testament prophets and the book of Revelation talk about. That is, someday when God comes back to really rule, Psalm 96 says, “Then will the trees of the woods sing for joy. Then will the sea roar and sing for joy. For he comes to rule the earth.”
When Christ comes back to rule the earth he will heal everything, and it will be like a feast. No more sickness. No more decay. No more crime. No more war. No more suffering. No more death. No more tears. That means Jesus’ miracles prove he is no happier with the way things are than you and I. That means we have a radical agenda.
Jesus’ miracles give us a radical agenda. What are they? Listen very carefully, because I’m trying to nuance what I’m about to say. When Jesus Christ shows he is not happy with the way things are, that he, even now, temporarily, is dealing with the suffering, injustice, disease, and hunger through his miracles, it’s a foretaste of what he’s going to do eventually.
What that means is while we’re here, we too need to have just as much holy dissatisfaction with the injustice, brokenness, sickness, and suffering we see out there, and we want to do something about it. Christianity is a fighting religion. C.S. Lewis says when we see cancer or a slum, we say that ought not to be, and we do what we can. In fact, Jesus actually says in John 14, “Whoever believes in me will do the works I do, and even greater.”
If you think that means miraculously dealing with suffering, no. We’re not going to do greater, because you can even look in the book of Acts, and you’ll see even though his disciples did a few miracles they were nothing like what Jesus could do. We should never think that’s what he means.
What he means is, “A billion people who are working off the same agenda out there can do greater works than even I do.” Here’s what I mean by nuance. Do you see (and we don’t have the time to go into this) over and over again when Jesus does a miracle he is concerned about the faith of the person he is helping?
When the woman with the hemorrhage touches his garment and she’s healed, he insists she come out and profess her faith. If you look carefully (and if we had time to go through this) you’ll see he actually pushes back a bit on the centurion. He’s trying to say, “What is it you want me to do? Do you want me to go and heal him?” He’s concerned to see the centurion’s faith.
Here’s what that means. The greatest thing you can do for anybody is not heal their body. It’s to give them a permanent and, therefore, eternal relationship with God through Jesus Christ. That’s the greatest thing you can do for anyone you love. Faith. Jesus shows us that’s the most important thing, not making the world a better place. And yet, he ministers in word and deed. He seeks to get people to believe in him, and yet, as you can see, there’s a certain indiscriminateness. You can see that down in verses 16 and 17. At some points he just heals people.
That’s how we need to be in this neighborhood. On the one hand, we need to respectfully and humbly call our neighbors to pay attention to Jesus, and to say, “Consider his claims and who he is, and see what spiritual riches he can give you should you believe in him. See what it means to be reconciled to the Father through what Jesus Christ has done.”
On the other hand we say, “But we are going to do what we can to alleviate need and suffering. We’re going to do what we can to love our neighbors whether they believe like we do or not,” because that’s how Jesus did it. His miracles are a radical agenda of caring for the needs of this world at the same time as we’re seeking to help people believe in him. Do you see how different they are?


3. Jesus’ miracles are a deep pattern of how he comes to save us

I’ll show you one more way in which the miracles are very different. The miracles are so different than the supernatural power of fictional figures. They not only alleviate suffering, but they do something else. Jesus’ miracles show the deep pattern of how he saved us.
Do you know how Satan tempted Jesus? If you were here a couple weeks ago when we looked at Matthew 4, you know two of the temptations, where Satan says, “Jesus, use your supernatural power to turn these stones into bread. You’re hungry, aren’t you? Just snap your fingers and … Bread!” There’s another place where he says, “Throw yourself off this cliff or pinnacle and come down without harming yourself and show the world who you are.”
What’s he doing? Isn’t this interesting? He’s trying to say, “I want you to be like Merlin. I want you to be like Superman,” because the supernatural powers of Merlin and Superman made them invulnerable. They made them impossible to attack. You couldn’t spear Superman. You couldn’t nail Superman. You couldn’t kill Superman, because his supernatural power made him invulnerable.
Jesus’ supernatural power does not do that. The grand miracle was the incarnation in which the Son of God became vulnerable. When the woman with the hemorrhage touched Jesus’ garment, do you remember what happened? How did he know she had been healed? He said, “Power went out from me.” He felt weak. In other words, his strength went to her. Her weakness went to him. Isn’t that interesting?
Do you know how often when Jesus Christ did a miracle it made his enemies angrier at him? Finally when he raised Lazarus from the dead in John 11, his enemies said, “Now we have to kill him.” Jesus’ supernatural power not only did not make him invulnerable, it made him more vulnerable, more spearable, more nailable, and more killable. Why?
The very last verse tells you. How does Jesus deal with our brokenness? He bears it! Because if Jesus Christ had actually come to earth ready to judge all evil and destroy all the evil that was destroying the world … If Jesus Christ came to bring judgment, we all would be gone. Why? Because you know it’s in us. You know we’re part of the problem. You know evil is in us. You know that.
If Jesus Christ just came to bring judgment we’d be gone, but he came to bear the judgment. He bore it! Not just the diseases but all the brokenness. Death itself. All the curse of us turning away from God. The disintegration, the weakness, the suffering, and the death that is our lot now fell on him on the cross. He bore the judgment so someday he can come back and make the world perfect again and end all evil without ending you and me.
The miraculous power shows that basically the deep pattern is strength through weakness. Jesus Christ saves us by becoming weak, going to the cross and dying for us. You and I get the power of God in our lives. How? By becoming weak, by repenting, by saying, “I need a Savior,” by saying, “I need forgiveness,” by saying, “I need a Master and a Lord.”
How are we going to bless the country? How are we going to bless the neighborhood? How are we going to bless the world? How are we going to deal with cancer and slums? We have to become weak, because the only way to really pour yourself out and to do the great works Jesus did is to give your money away, to give your time away, and to give your heart away. That’s what we have to do.
Rodney Stark, a great historian who wrote a great book called The Rise of Christianity, about why Christianity succeeded in the early centuries in the Roman world, tells us one of the reasons was because when plagues went through the great cities of the Greco-Roman Empire, people were literally dying in the street. The first one happened in AD 165. Another one happened a century later. Most people just stopped taking care of people and headed for the hills, but the Christians did not.
Let me give you two eyewitness accounts. I’m paraphrasing, but the first one says, “The doctors were quite incapable of treating the disease. The people became afraid to visit anyone, and as a result, thousands of people died with no one to look after them. Indeed, there were many houses in which all of the inhabitants perished through lack of any attention.
The bodies of the dying were heaped, one on top of the other, and half-dead creatures could be seen staggering about in the streets.” What a nightmare. “The catastrophe was so overwhelming that men became indifferent to every rule of morality. Many pushed sufferers away, even their dearest, often throwing them into the road before they were dead, hoping to avert contagion.”
But that’s not how the Christians acted. The Christians stayed and took care of not only their own sick but the sick of the people who weren’t Christians. Here’s what happened. I’m paraphrasing again, but this is another eyewitness account:
“Most Christians in the plague showed unbounded love and loyalty, never sparing themselves and only thinking of others. Heedless of danger, they took charge of the sick, attended to their every need, ministering to them in Christ, and many departed their life serenely happy, for they were infected by their neighbors and cheerfully accepted their pains. The best of our brothers lost their lives in this manner, a number of elders. Many in nursing and curing others transferred their death to themselves and died in their stead.”
Where do you think they got that idea from? What would empower people to be that weak? Of course, Rodney Stark’s whole point is when Christians did that, you realize what enormous power and credibility the gospel message had after that. Those people died, but there was a resurrection. Those people were weak, but there was enormous power in what they did.
Those people were following the pattern of Jesus, and that’s what we should be doing in this neighborhood. That’s what we should be doing in this city. Do you see how the miraculous power of Jesus is so utterly different than the stories of the world? Think of that. Go and do likewise. Let us pray.

Our Father, we pray you’d help us now as we come to the Table to internalize what we’ve just learned with our heads. We pray you would help us to understand better what your Son did for us and what this radical agenda is now for us to live out, here in this neighborhood, here in this city, in our lives in this world. We pray this in Jesus’ name, amen.







INTO JERUSALEM

Savior and Teacher—A Study of Matthew—March 8, 2012

Matthew 21:1–14

  1 As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, 2 saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt beside her. Untie them and bring them to me. 3 If anyone says anything to you, tell him that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
  4 This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet: 5 “Say to Daughter of Zion, ‘See, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’ ” 6 The disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them. 7 They brought the donkey and the colt, placed their cloaks on them, and Jesus sat on them.
  8 A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. 9 The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” 10 When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?”
  11 The crowds answered, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.” 12 Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves. 13“It is written,” he said to them, “ ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’ ” 14 The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.

  This is the Word of the Lord



Well, in the weeks leading up to Easter, what we are doing is we’re looking at the whole life of Jesus by looking at the main episodes in his life and we’re doing that in the gospel of Matthew. In a sense, we’re building a biography of Jesus as it were.
This very famous episode, the triumphal entry to Jerusalem, also called Palm Sunday (even though Matthew doesn’t mention that the branches that they were waving and putting on the ground for him were palms; it’s John that tells us that) … Even a casual reading of the passage reveals that Jesus is very carefully choosing exactly how it happens.
He’s actually orchestrating it in many ways because it’s deeply symbolic. It’s deeply symbolic because he wants to teach us something about who he is and what he came to do. What do we learn from this famous event? We learn three things. He’s riding in to the cheers of the crowd. He’s a king, but we’ll especially learn he’s the confrontational king. He’s a counter-intuitive king. He’s the coming king. We learn from the passage something about each one of those aspects of who he is.


1. He’s the confrontational king

Let me show you how confrontational he is. If you were reading the Gospels all the way through, you would notice up to now (this is certainly very, very clear in Matthew, Mark, and Luke) that when Jesus does a healing or casts out a demon or does a miracle, he always says to people, “Don’t tell anybody.” In other words, he’s constantly tamping down on people’s public proclamation of what they think about his identity.
He doesn’t want them to proclaim, “Oh, he’s this. Oh, he’s that.” He doesn’t want that. He’s constantly telling people, “Don’t say anything.” The reason is that the more the people make these great claims about who he is, the greater the claims, the more pressure that puts on the religious and civic leaders to stop him. Jesus knew that.
The more the claims got very high, the more it was pushing the religious and civic leaders to imprison him or kill him and that would be the end of his ministry. Jesus wasn’t ready to have his ministry ended; he had things to do and say. But now it changes and do you know why it changes? It’s amazing.
The blind men, the animal, the crowd, the temple … Look, first of all, at the blind men. In 20 of Matthew, right before this happens, Jesus is walking with crowds toward Jerusalem. It’s Passover so there are great crowds of people on the roads on the way in to Jerusalem. At one point, two blind men say to him, “Son of David, have mercy on us!”
Now Son of David is a messianic address. Son of David was the way they talked about the Messiah, the true Messiah, the one that they’d been waiting for for centuries, the one who was going to release and rescue Israel of all of its problems, liberate Israel. That’s what the Son of David meant.
So here, in front of a crowd, two blind men say, “Son of David, have mercy on us!” Jesus says, “What do you want me to do for you?” and then he heals them. Can you imagine how the disciples felt because they’d been watching Jesus constantly, keeping things secret? Here are two guys that say, “Oh, true, ultimate King Messiah,” and Jesus says, “Yes,” right in front of everybody and then he heals them.
That’s not all. Can you imagine the buzz? Can you imagine the excitement in the crowd? Jesus brought that about. Now Jesus decides, as you can see in the beginning of this passage, not to just walk in, but to ride in. Everybody else will be walking in; he’ll be riding. He chooses these two animals and he rides on one and he rides in.
In the gospel of John 12 (you almost have to read Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John together about the triumphal entry to get a full picture of what happened) crowds start coming out from Jerusalem to be part of the excitement of the crowds coming in to Jerusalem, and we see here what they begin to cheer.
They say, “Hosanna!” Now hosanna does not mean hooray for you. Hosanna doesn’t mean hooray; it means saves us. “Hosanna, Son of David!” Then they quote Psalm 118, which is a messianic psalm. So here you have (not in some backwater place, but the capital city) people ringing their praises of the messianic king. The crowd is shouting out, “Here he is!” as they go into the capital city.
Obviously, the cleansing of the temple, where Jesus goes to the temple and casts out the money changers because commerce had taken the place of worship in the precincts of the temple, is worth a sermon all by itself. It’s worth a lot of treatment. I put it in here just to show what’s going on. When Jesus shows up at the temple and he says, “My house shouldn’t be like this …” My house?
The only person who has the right to walk into a house and start rearranging the furniture is the owner. So here is what we have. Jesus Christ, after the cloak of secrecy for all this time, suddenly is publicly declaring himself to be the messianic king. He’s confronting the city and he’s confronting, in particular, the leaders. With that, he’s forcing the issue and he’s saying, “Crown me or kill me,” because essentially he’s pushed them to the place where they have to crown him or kill him.
They have to accept it and give him everything or they have to destroy him. That’s the first point. Do you see how confrontational he is? I’d like you to consider what this means for you. The fact is that you can’t read about Jesus in the Gospels without, in a certain sense, him saying that to you.
Reflect on this fact: Jesus is the only person I’ve ever seen or ever heard of or ever known who was unbelievably humble and not at all modest. Do you know of anybody like that? I don’t. Absolutely, incredibly humble, but not modest. What do I mean? Well, look at his life. Just read about it.
Look at his humility, how tender he is, how sweet he is, how gentle he is with women, with children, with the poor, with prostitutes, with people of other races and other nations, incredibly humble, gentle, sweet, tender, but absolutely not modest at all. He’s always saying things like, “Before Abraham was, I existed. I’m going to come back to judge the whole world. I am the power behind the whole universe. I was there when Satan fell from heaven.”
Now look, everybody I know who is humble is also modest and anybody I know who is very immodest and says incredible things like that is not humble and gentle with people and people of other races. Jesus Christ was unbelievably humble and absolutely immodest and that pushes things. Do you know why? It pushes things.
Reynolds Price, Duke University professor of English for many years who passed away recently, wrote this essay about the gospel of John and he was talking about the gospel writer John and the story of Jesus in the book of John. I’m reading this because it could be just as true of Matthew and the book of Matthew. Listen to what he says.
He says (I’m paraphrasing), “If two thousand years of pious handling had not dimmed our understanding of this story’s demand, his gospel would still been seen as the burning outrage it really continues to be. It is either a work of madness or of blinding revelation. The acts it portrays, the claims it advances, from the very first paragraph, demand that we make a hard choice. If we take the Gospel writer seriously, we must finally ask the question he thrusts so flagrantly toward us. Does he bring us a life transforming truth or is this one gifted lunatic’s tale of another lunatic wilder than he?”
You know, he might have been a fraud or might have been a lunatic. Maybe? No, because you can’t be humble and immodest at the same time. What Jesus Christ is doing here is he’s pushing the envelope. What he’s saying is, “Crown me or kill me.” In other words, “You can give me everything and make me your lord or you can run away from me and even try to kill me. All right. At least in both cases you’re listening to me, but I will not be liked. I don’t want anybody to like me. I want you to worship me and obey me or else I want you to flee from me, but I will not be liked.”
“Only two thousand years of pious handling,” to use Reynolds Price’s idea, puts us in a position where we don’t see what this really is claiming. Years ago, when I was a new Christian, I heard what back then was called a lordship talk by a woman who was a Bible teacher. It just had such an impact on me (and there were a number of illustrations which I’ve used over the years and you’ve heard them) but here’s the one I want to use now.
This woman Bible teacher was talking to us about lordship and here’s how she put it. She said something like, “My name is Barbara Boyd. If you say, ‘Come in, Barbara, but stay out Boyd,’ that’s very difficult for me because I don’t have a Barbara part or a Boyd part or like I can put the Barbara part in that door. I’m all Barbara and all Boyd so you either get all of me or none of me.”
Then she said, “You can’t say, ‘Come in Savior; stay out Lord.’ You can’t say, ‘Come in Helper; stay out King.’ ” It’s all of her or nothing. You have to give him everything; you have to make him the very center of your life. There can’t be any part of your life that you don’t let him have authority over and there can’t be any part of his word that you decide I’ll obey that but not that.
You can’t just say, “Come in Savior; stay out King. Come in Jesus; stay out Christ.” You get him all, or you get nothing. That’s what he’s telling you right here on Palm Sunday in this triumphal entry and that’s what anybody who reads the Bible will see. He’s the confrontational king.


2. He’s the counter-intuitive king

Well, where do I get that? It’s what he rode in on. Stanely Hauerwas, another Duke University writer (I’m not from Duke, I just happen to have two really great quotes from people from Duke) wrote a commentary on the book of Matthew and he has a take on triumphal entry which is seldom seen.
He thinks that Jesus Christ is deliberately giving us a satire of triumphal entries. What he basically says is, “On the one hand this looks like all other triumphal entries, does it not?” Two hundred years earlier, Simon Maccabee had defeated foreign armies and kept Israel independent. He rode in (this is just 200 years earlier) to Jerusalem with people shouting cheers and waving palm branches because he delivered them.
So on the one hand, this looks just like a triumphal entry, just the way you bring in a conquering king or a conquering hero. Hauerwas says, “Yet the triumphal entry is an entry that parodies the entry of kings and armies.” This is what he points out: “Victors in battle do not ride into their capital cities riding on asses but on fiercesome horses; this king does not and will not triumph through force of arms.”
You notice Jesus Christ deliberately chose a baby donkey to ride in on which is almost comical. I mean, you know, the Men of La Mancha rode on a horse. Sancho Panza rode on a little donkey. Here’s Jesus Christ being proclaimed as king riding in on this tiny little baby animal. Why? It’s very deliberate; it’s very clear. There’s a big deal made about it; it fulfills Scripture. Why? Why would this great messiah, this great king come in gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, on the foal of a donkey. Why would he do that?
The answer is he’s telling us something about himself, but he’s also telling us something about us. I think the thing he’s telling us about himself, you probably can intuit. I’m not sure … I think it’s easier to miss the point about us. The thing he’s telling us about himself is he’s coming in to rule and he’s coming in to save.
“Hosanna!” The word hosanna means to save, right? He’s coming in to rule and he’s coming in to save not by taking power and killing, but by losing power and dying. He’s going to die on the cross for our sins. In other words, he says, “I’m going to triumph through weakness and therefore my followers can only connect with my salvation by repenting and admitting their need.
First of all he’s telling us something about the very topsy-turvy understanding of salvation. We’re not saved by our good works, and therefore we’re not saved by a strong Savior, in a sense. Jesus Christ had not come in to say, “Look at how I’m living. Look at my power. Look at how moral and great I am. Now if you live like me, you can get to heaven.” A lot of people think that’s what he’s saying, but he’s not.
That would be salvation by strength and it would only be salvation for the strong which, by the way, isn’t very democratic, because a lot of people aren’t. Instead, it’s salvation through weakness. It’s salvation by giving up and dying on the cross so that people can have a free grace salvation. In spite of all of our flaws we can just be saved and pardoned in spite of our sins. That is utterly democratic, as it were.
Salvation through weakness for people who admit they’re weak means that anybody can come and anybody can get it. Do you see how counter-intuitive it is? But I think that that point, even though you might say, “Well, that’s great,” is not too hard to intuit as I said. I think it’s easier to miss the point he’s making about us. What is that? What are the expectations of this crowd?
Let me make my point starting with when we go to God, we go to him because we need something. Almost everybody I know heads out toward God because we have a problem, we have a need; we need something. You all remember 9/11, if you were here in the city, that every church was doubled and tripled in their attendance for several weeks afterwards. I talked to people. Why? They were scared; they were threatened. They were alone, so they showed up.
As a slightly less warranted and more comical example, I had a friend of mine who was a pastor in our town where we lived for a while in the Philadelphia area. Even though he was a pastor of a church, he was a chaplain on call at the local hospital. One night, he was called to go (in the middle of the night practically) to a man who needed to talk to a pastor.
When he got there, the man just apologized and said, “I’m so sorry. They actually got the x-rays mixed up. I really don’t have cancer, so I really don’t need to talk to a pastor.” He really missed his chance because all he needed to say was, “Really? I’ve never talked to anybody who’s never going to die. You’re a very interesting person, fascinating. You don’t need a pastor. Okay, tell me, what is it like to live forever?” But he didn’t because he’s a pastor and we’re nice people. So he left, ironically, and went home.
In other words, our problem is we go to God and we say to God, “You need to give me exactly what I think I need from you, what I think I need from you.” Now what did these people think they needed? They thought they needed someone to bring judgment down on the people who were ruining the world. “The Romans, they’re ruining the world. They’ve oppressed us all.”
They thought they needed from God someone to bring judgment down on the people who were ruining the world. What they actually needed was someone to come and bear the judgment for them because they were the people who were ruining the world because everybody in the human race is part of that. What they really needed was pardon for sins.
What they really needed was something to reconcile them to God, someone to bear the punishment they deserved so that someday God could come back to earth and end all evil without ending you and me. So there is what they wanted, what they thought they needed, and what Jesus actually gave them. There were the expectations and that’s why they were saying, “Hooray! Hooray! Hooray! You’re coming and giving us what think we need.”
Of course, Jesus wasn’t bringing that at all. Here are two implications of that. First, there’s never been a better example of the absolute worthlessness of human celebrity than Palm Sunday. As you know, the crowds were coming out from Jerusalem and the crowds were coming in. They’re shouting, “Hosanna! This is the King!” The city was only so big (Jerusalem was not enormous by our standards) therefore, statistically and almost certainly some of the people shouting, “Hosanna!” on this day were shouting, “Crucify him!” a few days later.
There’s never ever been a more vivid portrait of the fickleness of corporate human nature and of the worthlessness of human celebrity. You want approval, you want celebrity, and you want the regard of the world? Sure you might get it; you might be one of the lucky ones that get it, but you’ll be on the trash heap soon. How different is God’s regard?
How much more important is the praise of God than the praise of men? Here are a few verses … Jesus says, “Him who comes to me I will in no wise cast out.” (John 6:37) “My sheep hear my voice; I know them. They follow me. I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can every pluck them out of my hand.” (John 10:27, 28)
“I am persuaded that the good work God began in you, he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ.” (Philippians 1:6) “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor anything in all creation can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Romans 8:38, 39)
“I will never, never, never, never, never forsake you.” (Hebrews 13:5) Five nevers: “… I will never, never, never, never, never forsake you.” Psalm 27:10, “Though my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will receive me.” Or what about something that’s often repeated in the book of Psalms, “His steadfast love endures forever.” When Jesus Christ loves you, when Jesus Christ puts his love … “Those whom he loves, he loves to the end.” (John 13:2) “Those whom he loves, he loves to the end.” Those whom the world loves, it loves until Saturday. That’s about it.
On the one hand, don’t mistake human approval, popularity, and acclaim for … Human celebrity is nothing. Here is the other thing. I read one commentator who rightly said that Palm Sunday, the story of the triumphal entry, is an incredible parable of the lifelong mismatch between what you want from God and what God is providing.
It is a lifelong mismatch between what our expectations are and what God actually provides, what we think we need and what God says we need. What we think we need is almost always shallow and God gives us … what? He exceeds our expectations in the end, but in the short run it can be very confusing. I mean when these folks came in and said, “Oh, you’re going to give us what we want. We need all this liberation.” A few days later, he’s dead. “Well, he failed.” No he didn’t.
Therefore, would you please keep in mind that when you come to him, virtually always, he going to give you what you really need not what you think you need. He’s going to confound your expectations, but he’s going to exceed them. To put this in a nutshell, God always gives you what you would have asked for if you knew everything he knows.
I’ll tell you, brothers and sisters, friends and neighbors (friends, Romans, and countrymen …), if you learn this you’ll live a pretty contented, non-anxious life. If you don’t learn that, you won’t. For some of you, you have to learn that even to be saved. Why? Because almost always at first we go to him thinking we need liberation from this or that.
“I have my felt needs. I have problems here and you need to help me.” And Jesus always says, “I’m going for the root of things which is you need to be reconciled to God. You need to have your sins dealt with and you need to have a relationship with God through me.”


3. He’s the coming king

Over the years, especially in churches that use lectionaries, where they give you an Old Testament reading, a psalm, a New Testament epistle, a Gospel reading every week of the year, it is surprising how often (and they’re right when they do this) on the triumphal entry day, Palm Sunday, they give you readings that have to do with the second coming of Christ.
Because on the one hand, the people thought Jesus Christ was coming to Jerusalem on that day to put everything right, to put down all injustice, all suffering, and everything. They thought it was going to bring everything right and he wasn’t. He was coming to put you right with God. It’s a picture in two little ways, there’s two ways in which this fascinating event depicts that future coming when he returns and he does put everything right.
One of them has to do with the branches and the palm trees. You know, when they say, “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord,” the blessedness that they’re asking from the Messiah is the same thing as shalom. The word blessedness and shalom are the same basic words. Shalom means complete thriving and flourishing.
When they’re calling out to the Messiah, what they’re really calling out for is, “Put absolutely everything right.” When they wave the palm branches, do you know what that means? It’s looking forward to the day in which the palm trees wave their own branches because it says in Psalm 96:12, “Then the trees of the wood will sing for joy before the Lord, for he comes to rule the earth.”
Isaiah 55:12 says, “… the mountains and hills will burst into song before you, and all the trees of the field will clap their hands.” You say, “Oh, that’s metaphorical.” Maybe, yeah, but what it’s trying to say is when the true king comes back and puts everything right, everything in nature will work again. There will be complete harmony, complete peace.
It’s the end of death, disintegration, and decay; it’s the end of sickness. It’s the end of everything that’s wrong with the material world. Someday, maybe, the trees themselves will literally dance and sing. You know, they’re just shadows of what they’re going to be under Jesus. The trees … But that’s not all. I have a friend, Don Carson, who wrote a commentary on the book of Matthew. He’s the only person who mentions this in the commentaries, but I like it so I’m going to tell you.
I’m paraphrasing, but he says, “One of the things that is so strange is everybody who knows anything about animals (horses, mules, donkeys) knows that you can’t just jump on one of them and expect to ride it. They have to be broken.” You can’t just jump on a steed and just take off. It is scared, especially a baby donkey, and especially one that you’re riding through a yelling crowd. Humanly speaking, no rider could just jump on an animal and then just have it ride very calmly through a huge crowd. This is what Don Carson says about that quote.
In the midst of this excited crowd, an unbroken, young animal remains totally calm under the hands of the Messiah who controls nature and stills the storm. Therefore this event points to the peace of the consummated kingdom. What is he saying? Jesus didn’t have to break the animal. He’s Lord of nature; he’s the Lord of all and under his hand, nothing but harmony and peace comes about. The animal knows and loves its true master for who he is.
This is a foreshadowing then of the complete healing of all nature under the future kingship of Christ. As it is written in Isaiah 11:6 and 9, “The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, and the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.”
What I love about Palm Sunday, about the triumphal entry, is on the one hand it’s telling everybody, “Listen, the number one thing you need is to get a personal relationship with God through Jesus Christ and have your sins dealt with and be reconciled to him. So have faith in him.” That’s the first thing you need.
Secondly, it’s saying to Christians that God does care about this world. Jesus Christ comes in, not looking for power, but to serve. Jesus Christ is looking forward to the time in which the problems around us will be gone (the sickness, old age, poverty, oppression) so let’s do what we can now to show that Jesus hates those things too.
Let’s tell our neighbors, “Have faith in him.” Then let’s work with our neighbors and deal with their needs whether they believe like we do or not. Then you truly will be following the Lord who rode in on that little baby donkey and really did save us. Let’s pray.

Our Father, we thank you for the richness of Scripture, first of all. We thank you for the richness of your salvation; it’s not one-dimensional. We thank you for the ways in which you confront us every time and comfort us at the same time. What comfort this is! What comfort, that your regard and your applause never ends, though the world’s does.

What comfort that you always give us what we would have asked for if we knew everything you know. What comfort and yet what confrontation. We can’t just use Jesus; we can’t just have Jesus in our life in some peripheral way. He has to be the center of everything or not there really at all. Father, thank you that you always comfort us more than you confront us.

You promise us rewards, blessings, and benefits that just completely swamp the cost and yet the cost is great. We pray that you would help us follow the One who rode in gentle … gentle to give his life for us. Remake us into the image of the One who came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for us all. We pray it in Jesus’ name, amen.


Timothy J. Keller, The Timothy Keller Sermon Archive, 2012-2013 (New York: Redeemer Presbyterian Church, 2013).


Exported from Logos Bible Study, 11:22 AM March 6, 2026.

