








2016


What We Are Receiving: The Gospel Goods

    1      Home from Exile—Genesis 3:7–24
    2      Reconciled and at Peace—Hebrews 9:11–14
    3      Bought out of Slavery—Romans 3:22–31
    4      Hope in the Face of Death—1 Thessalonians 4:13–18
    5      The Sin-Bearer—Isaiah 52:13–53:12

Where We are Going: The City and the Mission

    1      The Centrality of the Gospel—Galatians 2:11–21
    2      Changed Lives—John 4:6–26
    3      Public Faith—John 4:27–42
    4      Doing Justice and Mercy—Isaiah 58:1–14
    5      Encountering the Risen King—John 20:1–18
    6      Counter Culture for the Common Good—Matthew 5:11–16
    7      Faith and Work—Isaiah 60:1–11, 18–21
    8      Serving the City—Jeremiah 29:1–14
    9      A Movement—1 Peter 2:4–12

What We Are Becoming: Transforming Love

    1      Love, the Most Excellent Way—1 Corinthians 13:1–13
    2      Love and Forgiveness—Romans 12:9–21
    3      Love, Patience, and Suffering—Romans 8:16–28
    4      Love and Truth—Ephesians 4:14–15, 25–32
    5      Love and Power—Romans 14:1–3, 14–15:7

Practical Faith: Studies in James

    1      Patience—James 5

Jesus, Mission, and Glory: New Purpose

    1      Sent to Show Christ’s Glory—John 12:27–36
    2      Sent to Bear Witness—John 12:37–50
    3      Sent to Bring Freedom—John 8:31–36, 56–59
    4      Sent in Love—John 13:1–5
    5      Sent with Grace—John 13:6–11
    6      Sent to Love—John 13:12–17

Jesus, Mission, and Glory: New Identity

    1      The Disciple and the Bible—John 13:18–24
    2      The False Disciple—John 13:21–30
    3      The True Disciple—John 13:31–36
    4      The Future Disciple—John 13:33–38

Jesus, Mission, and Glory: Advent

    1      The Word—John 1:1–11
    2      Born Again—John’s Gospel 1:12, 13
    3      The Glory of the Incarnation—Gospel of John 1:14–18
    4      The Power of the Incarnation—John 1:19–28

Sermons by Date
Sermons by Series
Sermons by Reference









What We Are Receiving: The Gospel Goods




Home from Exile

The Scripture reading this morning is from Genesis 3:7–24.

  Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves. Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the LORD God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the LORD God among the trees of the garden. But the LORD God called to the man, “Where are you?” He answered, “I heard you in the garden and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid.” And he said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?” The man said, “The woman you put here with me—she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I ate it.” Then the LORD God said to the woman, “What is this you have done? The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.” So the LORD God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, ‘Cursed are you above all livestock and all wild animals! You will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life. And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel.” To the woman he said, “I will make your pains in childbearing very severe; with painful labor you will give birth to children. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.” To Adam he said, “Because you listened to your wife and ate fruit from the tree about which I commanded you, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat food from it all the days of your life. It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your brow, you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return.”
  Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the mother of all the living. The LORD God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them. And the Lord God said, “The man has now become like one of us knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever. So the LORD God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken. After he drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden, cherubim, and a flaming sword flashing back and forth, to guard the way to the tree of life. The word of the Lord.


Now, in the first few months of this year, we’re going to be spending a lot of time in various congregations, various venues, talking about Redeemers’s future, what we hope to be doing in the next decade with regard to ministry in this great city. But no church should be thinking about the future without making sure that its feet are firmly grounded in the gospel, the historic gospel, the gospel that the Bible describes, its character, its power. And so we’ve for the first few weeks of this year, we’re going to be looking at a series of passages from the Bible and we’re going to call this series, The Gospel Goods.” The unimaginable benefits and goods that the gospel brings us.
This passage is seminal. It’s from the very beginning of the Bible. It tells us what’s wrong with the human race. It’s an account of the fall of the human race, as it’s called. And we looked at the first part of it actually, at the end of last year. Here, what we’re going to do is, see what it says about what is fundamentally wrong with the human race so that we can see the first of the great goods that the gospel brings to us, at least in this series. So, when we look at this passage, let’s learn—here’s what we’re going to be taught—let’s learn that all human beings are homeless exiles, all human beings are exiles, and secondly, why we’re all exiles, and number three, how we can be brought home.
But sorry, those things that we are all exiles, why we’re all exiles and how we can be brought home. That we’re all exiles, we see this in verse 23, and 24. Be ready to read that. But let me just get you ready for these two verses like this. Cathy’s right now reading a book called The Shepherd’s Wife, and it’s about, it’s written by a man whose family has done sheep farming in one particular remote valley in England for at least six generations, might be longer, at least six generations. So, anybody, you know, for a couple hundred years, every member of the family has always lived in that one place, and so, if you forcibly took somebody from that family and took him to a big city like London or something like that, they might feel like exiles, they might feel, “I don’t fit here,” “I don’t belong here,” “I feel like an alien here.”
But that sense of dislocation is nothing like probably what right now all the refugees in the Middle East that are being brought into Europe, it’s all in the news right now of course and elsewhere, their sense of social dislocation of not fitting, of not belonging of being aliens is, would be a lot stronger. But actually perhaps the ultimate example of this is to literally be homeless, to literally be homeless is to be living on the street, even in terrible weather.
We all know, both common sense tells us and studies tell us that, that is the most brutalizing and dehumanizing possible situation to be in. Why? You know, what is home? Home is where you fit. Home is where you can be yourself. Home is actually where your needs are being met. See, if you’re homeless, you’re just being drained, you’re out there. Home is a haven. At home, you are restored, so you can grow and thrive. Outside of home, you’re drained. Outside you drain, at home, you’re restored and you’re given what you need in order to grow and thrive. Okay. Now, read verse 23, and 24 with me. “So the Lord God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken.” He was banished. The human race is banished from the ground from which he had been taken, the ground that he, Adam was, not only, he was not only, you know, made for it, he was made from it. And, then it says, “After (that) he drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden cherubim and a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life.”
What we’re being told here is that the whole human race that can, the human condition, the condition of the whole human race is homelessness and exile, writ large. What we’re being told here is that the world that we live in right now, we actually don’t belong in, we’re not made for it. And we know we’re not made for it. And it does not give us the resources we need to thrive. It does not meet our deepest longings.
That’s what the Bible is saying. You know, Martin Heidegger and Karl Marx, two twentieth century thinkers who were very different. Heidegger was a fascist sympathizer, Karl Marx, of course was, he was in the nineteenth century and he was the, you know, the father of communism. And these two guys, both said, you cannot understand human life unless you understand the concept of alienation that human beings are actually estranged from the sources, the resources that in which they thrive. Eva Hoffman, a Jewish, a Polish Jewish intellectual whose parents and her family was dislocated because of the Holocaust, they had to leave Poland, she has a fascinating essay on a sense of exile and of course, she was part of a group of people who were expelled from their homeland, you know, the land that they felt this is where I’m from, this is where I belong, this is where I fit, this is what suits me, and, the court, had become homeless had the ex-husband, her reflection, though, is quite profound on that. She says in an essay, since Adam and Eve left the Garden of Eden, is there anyone who does not in some way feel like an exile?
But she goes on in the essay to say that those of us who have been estranged from our literal physical home, very often get this deep nostalgia, deep nostalgia for it, and say, if I could just get back there. If I get to get into that landscape, into that place with those people, tThen the emptiness I’m feeling, the dissatisfaction I’m feeling then would be healed. And Eva Hoffman goes on to say that that deep nostalgia we have for these physical places if we actually get back to them, we discover that we’re not completely satisfied by it. She actually says that that physical homelessness actually signifies something deeper. And she says, “We are ejected from our authentic self.” That’s the human condition. We’ve been ejected from our authentic self. And then she says, “An ideal sense of belonging, attuning with others and ourselves eludes us.”
I don’t know if any of you just saw the movie, a 1985 movie, A Trip to Bountiful, starring Geraldine Page, I just want to, it’s not an action film. Geraldine Page did win the Academy Award for Best Actress. And it’s a story of an older woman who’s living in a city in a little tiny apartment with her son, and daughter in law doesn’t really like her and children, and she and she’s feeling empty and she’s feeling nostalgic for bountiful, bountiful, Texas which is the name of the town near the coast where she grew up, and she begins to dream that if I could just get back to bountiful, everything would be okay. I would feel right again, I would, my longings would be, my heart, the emptiness, they would they’d be fulfilled. And the whole story is about her going AWOL basically and running out there and getting there and finding it, it was in a ruin, it was that a lot of the people were gone. And that, exactly what Eva Hoffman said that physical homelessness is actually just a sign of something deeper. And as an ideal sense of belonging, attuning with others and ourselves, eludes us, this world is not our home. It’s just, the world we are in right now is not what we were made for and that’s what the Bible says.
So how does that really what does that look like? What does it mean that we’re exiles and homeless? You know, Karl Marx said the fundamental alienation that human beings experience is economic, if we could solve that then the others would be fine. A course, Sigmund Freud said the fundamental alienation was psychological.
Emile Durkheim said, “The fundamental,” (he’s another twentieth century sociologist), said, “The fundamental alienation we experience is social.” Martin Heidegger says, “Our alienation is existential.” And you know what the Bible says to all that? Right! Yes. In fact, it’s all in this text. What’s fascinating about the central part of this text is, how all those different aspects of alienation of being estranged from in a sense what we were made for, they’re all here. Though the Bible goes deeper than any of those thinkers and says, “No, the fundamental alienation from which all the other alienation is come is not economic,” iIt’s not psychological, it’s not social, it’s theological, it’s spiritual. Let’s take a look. Let’s walk backwards in a sense through the text. First of all, take a look here at verses, say, 16–19. And here we’re going to learn that we’re not physically at home because we’re alienated from nature. We’re not physically at home. So, for example, in verse 16, it says, now, childbearing. In this life, childbearing is both painful and dangerous. Verse 17, it says that work, 17, especially 18 says, that work now drains you. It’s labor is laborious. It’s not easy. It’s difficult. It wears you down. But of course, most vividly, the second half of verse 19 is where God says, until you return to the ground since from it you were taken, for dust you are and to dust you will return.
Now, there are books, lots of books, and lots of educational resources that tried to say to modern people, don’t be afraid of death. Death is just a natural part of life. But Welsh poet Dylan Thomas is a lot closer to the biblical view when he says we should rage against the dying of a light.
Albert Camus, the French novelist and philosopher was far closer and say what the Bible says when he says, death makes life absurd. The fact that we’re going to die mean makes everything in our life meaningless, empty and absurd.
Why? Well, let’s just think of one thing, all right? Love, me, what really makes your life meaningful? What really makes your life bearable? It’s love relationships. That’s what does it, and what does death do? Death strips you of that? First of all, death takes away eventually. At first, death takes away every important person in your life, and then eventually takes you away. So, let’s not be afraid of death. All it can do is strip you off of everything that makes life meaningful and bearable.
No, we should rage against the dying of the life. Albert Camus says, what he says is absolutely right. And what the Bible is saying is, as long as there’s death in this world, this world is not what we’re built for. We’re not built for a place where there’s disease and aging and suffering and death. We’re not built for it. We know that. And the Bible tells you directly what all human beings know intuitively, that we’re really not meant for a world in which there’s disease and suffering and death. We’re not adapted for that world.
We are not. Secondly, however, the Bible doesn’t just say here that our life is that we’re marked by homelessness and exile because we’re physically alienated from nature. We’re not physically, and, secondly, like Durkheim said, we’re not socially at home. We’re not really at home with other people. We’re alienated from other people to a great degree, in spite of the love relationships; to a great degree we’re alienated from other people, that is always breaking in on ourselves. We’re really not socially at home How so? Well, Of course, when you get up here to verse 7, in the very beginning as soon as Adam and Eve sinned, it says, “Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked.” Now we’ll get back to that. That’s a very significant,—I won’t mention that right here, but it says, “and so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for them.” What is that? The answer is that, human beings right now are alienated from each other. We cannot really just let people see who we are. We got to control what they say. Well, in other words, our relationships are no longer about love and service. Our relationships are fundamentally about power. We need to control what people see so we can control what people do, so we can control what people say, so we can control people. We’re not there to love and serve them. We’re there to control them, but because we’re hiding who we really are from other people because we have to control what they see, we’re also lonely.
So, human relationships are marked by power rather than service and superficiality and loneliness. Now you actually see all sorts of signs of it. Of course, it’s almost humorous. But in verses 11, 12 and 13, you have the blaming. The man blames the woman, anything new about that? But here, but this is where it first happened. So you know, you can say, “I was there.” The woman blames nature, blames the serpent, blames the devil. And of course, it is more to it than that because, see, down in verse 16, and again, this is one of those things that we’re not going to talk about it even though this is, if I really wanted to completely unpack this passage for you, I’d be doing it every three verses for a number of weeks. So, I can’t do that with this large piece of text. But down here it says to the woman, Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.” You say, “Oh, what does that mean?” Well, I’m not going to go there right now. But, I’m going to tell you this, this means that there’s an alienation between the genders.
And we know because of, because the relationships are now matters of power and control, not of love and service, and that is the default mode of human relationships. That’s what Durkheim would say. What Emile Durkheim would say is, okay, here’s the community, here’s the individual, right? If you say the community is more important than the individual, which men in many cultures, that’s the way it is, then there’s exploitation. Hmm? But if you say like in our culture, the individual is more important in that community, then you have the complete erosion of solidarity and social institutions. And what this means is, the classes are alienated from each other, the races are alienated from each other. The nations are alienated from each other. So, war and crime and poverty and justice, as well as family breakdown and the fact that we just that all relationships just need so much maintenance just to keep them okay.
Why? Because we’re not home. There’s something about this world, we’re alienated physically, we’re alienated socially, thirdly, we’re alienated psychologically. Now let’s go back up to verse 10. When God comes and says, What are you hiding from me? What does Adam say? I was afraid, so I hid. When he says they were naked, I knew I was naked, and therefore I was ashamed and I hid. In the Bible, a Hebrew idiom, idiomatically nakedness did not just mean to be nude, it meant to be ashamed, it meant to be ashamed of who you were. And what we’re being told here is this: psychological explanation means we are alienated from our true selves.
We feel shame. We feel fear because we feel like there’s something wrong with us. We get angry if people tell us there is. We can’t stand criticism. We look into our hearts and we can tell there’s something that’s wrong with us. That’s reason why we work so hard. Why are you working so hard in your career? Why do you worry so much about how you look? So you can attract a partner or some kind of, what’s going on there? Because you know, there’s something you’re not at ease with yourself, you know, there’s something wrong with you, and you’re covering the fig leaves. Workaholics, those are fig leaves.
There’s something psychologically wrong with us. We’re alienated from who we really are. We’re not at ease with who we are. And actually, I’ll give you this and I’m about to crossover into the last and the most fundamental alienation of all, make it crossover like this: According to the Bible, according to this passage, the essence of sin is thinking, you can live without God. The essence of sin is, a human being who is made by God, who is made for God, who was made to know and love and serve God, thinking, well, I, maybe every so often, I might need God for a boost or something, but I don’t need to rely on him every, you know, moment by moment. “The hardest sin is saying, “I can live my life on my own, I don’t need God.”
And, at the top level of our heart, in a more conscious level, that’s what we believe, but at the bottom level, we know it’s not true, and as a result, the conflict, the depth of conflict, see, every psychological system says that you’ve got to come to grips with who you are, that you’ve got to understand who you are; you need to not be alienated from your true self. The Bible says that without the intervention of the Holy Spirit, nobody will ever do that.
Because, the alienation is deeper than anybody thinks. So, and that leads us to our last alienation, the alienation, which is the source of all the others. Yes, we’re physically alienated, yes, we’re socially alienated, yes, we’re psychologically alienated. We’re cut off from nature, we’re cut off from other human beings, we’re cut off even from our true self, but why? Go ahead! Make yourself a great physical home, that’ll help. We need that. Go ahead, build community. Go ahead, go to counseling, come to greater grips with who you are. But ultimately, that’s not going to satisfy. What Eva Hoffman said, all those things signify something deeper. And what is the deeper thing? It’s that we’re cut off from God. We’re alienated from God.
Verse 8, what a picture! Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord as he was walking in the garden, in the cool of the day, and they hid from the Lord among the trees of the garden. In the Bible, when it talks about walking with somebody, it doesn’t just talk about literally walking, even, by the way, even in English, if we say, I need someone to walk with me through this, you’re not just saying literally walking. You mean you want a friend.
And when the Bible actually, all through the, especially the Old Testament, it talks about walking with somebody, it’s talking about friendship. As for God to come walking toward human beings and for human beings to run away, well, there it is. This is the human condition. We’re running from the God who wants to walk with us. We’re running from the God who wants to have a relationship with us and was walking with, it was only walking with God that we were, only there were we home. As long as we’re running from God, we will never be home.
You know how? Ps 90 says, God is our eternal home, we sing about it, you know, Oh, God our help in ages past, and our eternal home. God’s home, walking with God, the face of God, the presence of God, the garden of God, that was home. Let me show you. What is home? How is the place where you’re fed, where you’re nurtured, where the deepest desires of your heart and soul, you were, you’re fed up out there, out of our way from home, you’re drained.
At home, that’s where you’re nurtured. Only, only walking with God was home. There was the splendor and glory of God in the garden. Walking with God, there was the splendor and glory of God and one of your greatest deepest needs is for beauty, there. Oh, you’re looking for beauty in so many ways. Only in the face of God, will you get the beauty that your soul was made for. Or Secondly, the Word of God, you know, when you walk with people, you talk with them. Can you imagine the conversations you have with God? That’s the Word of God right from Hhis lips. See, human beings also have a desire for knowledge, we want to know, we want to explore, we have incredible desire to know well, only walking with God. Think of what God could tell us about the universe.
Only walking with God and hearing His Word from his lips will satisfy the deepest longings of your souls and now, only his glory will satisfy the deepest longings of your heart for beauty. Even His work, you know, God put us, it said, into a garden, to cultivate it. But if you read it more, a little more closely and carefully, what He was saying is, in My presence, work is nothing but satisfying. In My presence, you will be doing what you were built to do, which is to draw out the hidden potentialities of creation that I put into creation.
And so, we have this deep capacity for creativity with this deep capacity for accomplishment and only in the presence of God we have that satisfied. But I guess, most of all, there was the beauty of God and His glory, there was the work of God, there was the Word of God but also there was the face and the arms of God. We have a need for love. Haven’t you ever seen when someone, you say if somebody would say that to me, if they would affirm me, if I can get that award, if somebody would say that to me, then I wouldn’t want anything else, and then you get it and you need something else. It’s like you’ve got an infinite shaped hole there. It’s like a bottomless pit. And no matter how much love you put into it, it just, it’s never enough. It just isn’t enough. You know why? Because God’s love has to be there and God’s love is infinite only. If someone you adore infinitely, loves you endlessly, will you ever be completely satisfied?
One place in C. S. Lewis’s wonderful sermon, A Weight of Glory, he says this. He says, “Almost our whole education has been directed to silencing this shy, persistent inner voice, and convince us that the good of man is to be found on this earth, … thus giving a sop to your sense of exile in earth as it is.” So, all of our education says, Well, if you have the therapy, if we make the world a better place, if we do this and we do that, then the world will be our home, offering us a sop to your sense of exile in earth as it is. And then he says, Wordsworth’s expedient was to identify with certain moments in his own past, just like Geraldine page did in Trip to Bountiful, but Lewis says, this is a cheat, by the way, that’s me that wasn’t Lewis saying anything about Geraldine page, and put that out of words would. Let me just read you the text and stop doing that. Wordsworth’s expedient was to identify it with certain moments in his own past. But all this is a cheat.
If Wordsworth had gone back to those moments in the past, he would not have found the thing itself, but only the reminder of it, for the beauty that we remember, are just good images of what we really desire. If they’re mistaken for the thing itself, they turn into dumb idols breaking the hearts of their worshipers. For they are not the thing itself, they are only the scent of a flower we have not yet found, the echo of a tune we have not yet heard, news from a country we have not yet visited or found.
Now, how can we be brought home? Number one and number two, there’s just two things I’m going to tell you from this text. Number one, do you believe what I just said? Do you believe the biblical analysis of why you have all these problems that you’ve got that I’ve been listing? Nobody’s doubting about the alienation. Everybody says it’s there. Do you believe what the Bible says is the source, and what is that? The source is this. We’ve broken our relationship with God because we’ve decided not to treat Him the way we ought to treat Him. Look, God made Adam and Eve. He made the human race. And so, we owe Him Everything. And yet we decide we’re going to be our own masters. We’re going to be our own authors. We live as if we’re our own authors, and we’re not. Now, if you’ve ever been in a relationship, you know that if someone wrongs you, it breaks the relationship and how can the relationship, the alienation be healed? If you’re in a relationship and someone wrongs you, how can the alienation, the broken relationship be healed? The answer is, through repentance and forgiveness. The person who’s done wrong has to repent. Ah, but the person who’s been wronged has to forgive. And so, it’s not enough just to say, “Oh, okay, well, I’m sorry,” and, “I’m going to try to live for God.” No, no, God has to forgive. And forgiveness is always, always expensive.
Always expensive. Look, if someone wrongs you, by costing you a lot of money, then the only way to forgive that person, to really forgive them and not make them payback is, you absorb the cost you pay it. Or, let’s just say someone wronged you and destroyed your reputation, if you’re going to forgive them, you just absorb it. You don’t try to get your reputation back by vilifying them. If you’re going to really forgive them, you pay it.
Forgiveness is always expensive. And, if this ultimate relationship between God and the human race that’s created this ultimate alienation and all the alienations we experience if that happened, and it did, then the payment for that debt, the cost of that forgiveness would be astonishing. And it is, do you believe that? Do you believe that the healing of all your alienations will be the healing of your alienation with God? You can only come at infinite cost to God Himself. If you believe that, then you can take the second point. The two ways to heal it to be brought home is, one is accept this analysis and number two, accept God’s provision, and God’s provision is hinted out here that it takes the rest of the Bible to see it. But it’s so wonderful.
Take a look at verse 21 and 24. And the Lord God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them. That is really weird. The Lord God took animal skins and clothed Adam and Eve. Now, one level, those would have been way better than fig leaves. And what it did mean was something lost its life, so that they could be clothed, and to some degree, help from their physical alienation, obviously, by the way, you know, you can’t walk around without clothes in a world in which nature is no longer your friend, you know, you die of exposure. So, what God is doing at one level is, he’s working on the physical alienation, and someone had to die in order for that to happen.
What is it going to take for not our bodies, just to be helped a little bit with the physical alienation, but for our souls to be healed of our spiritual alienation, what will it take to be clothed in the righteousness that we need to stand in the presence of a holy God? When Jesus Christ went to the cross, He paid the price it took for God to forgive us. He was stripped. You know, the only garment, the only thing he owned is his garment. He was stripped. He was naked, he was put up there, he was shamed. He was naked, and he was mocked. Why? He was stripped naked so that we could be clothed, or put it this way, when he cried out, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?, He was being cut off from the Father, so we could be brought in. You know, Jesus said, “Foxes have holes, birds have nests, the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.” Jesus was a wanderer. Jesus was a sort of an exile and on the cross, when he experienced that cut, being cut off from God, that was the ultimate exile. He took the exile that we deserve, so we can be brought in. And not only that, you know, that sword, that flashing sword, the cherubim, which is always a sign of the presence of God, flashing sword, keeping us from getting back to the tree of life. What is that all about? It’s the penalty for sin is death. The only way back into home is through, under the sword and Jesus Christ went through that. It says so, Isa 53, where it says about the Suffering Servant. He was cut off from the land of the living.
He was cut off. If you accept that provision, and let’s just be real realistic. If you say Jesus Christ died for me, Father, accept me, bring me in and my exile, because your son, experienced my exile, clothe me because your son experienced my nakedness, accept me because of what Jesus did, not because of anything I have done. The moment you do that, you’re guaranteed that you will be brought home. Now the reality is Camus is right.
Let me tell you a story to end here. Camus is absolutely right. As long as death is in this world, this world is still not home. But here’s what you can say. You realize, once you believed in Jesus Christ, first of all, you can visit home, but you can’t stay there. Home is when you have a new heavens and new earth, and everything is put right. And you finally fit, and evil and suffering is gone. And death is gone. So, we’re not there yet, but you can visit that home. You just can’t stay there. What do you mean? Well, we’re actually going to sing about it. For example, it says, “Guide me oh Thou great Jehovah, pilgrim through this barren land, but then he says, feed me bread of heaven. When you come to a worship service, sometimes you break the bread, you know, the Lord’s Supper. When you hear a good sermon, when the Lord works through your heart as you’re listening to the sermon, when you pray, when you sense His presence, when you’re with the people of God, you know what that is? You know why it restores? Do you know why you feel healed? Do you know why you can sort of handle the drain of life out there because you have visited home? Have a great prayer life. Don’t miss worship, be with the people of God, listen to the Word of God, visit home.
The other thing you need to know is that when you get home, you will be accepted. I don’t know if any of you saw the TV series Fargo that was played at the end of last year? It’s a pretty wild story in many ways. It’s about a lot of darkness and it’s all got Camus themes. Albert Camus, one of the episodes is called, The Myth of Sisyphus, which is one of Albert Camus’s books, and what’s funny about this is, with all the nastiness and all the brutality and all the darkness, there’s this one family, they’re called The Solver Sins, who are really decent people, and they don’t have rose-colored glasses on, they know how things are. And yet they’re doing the right thing and they’re doing the right thing. Now, in this series, there’s this solemn teenage girl named Noreen and she’s, you know a smart girl and she’s in a little town and you know how smart teenage girls in little towns can feel. And, she’s always reading Camus, and telling people what Camus says, you know, and at one point, she turns to a young mother, Betsy Sylverson, who’s dying of cancer. And she’s sitting there alongside of her little girl and she knows she’s not going to live to see her grow up. But she’s brave and she’s good, and she’s just what you ought to be. And Noreen looks at her and she says, “Camus says, ‘No one who’s going to die makes life absurd.’ ” It’s an unbelievably insensitive thing to say to a young mother dying of cancer but you know, she’s a young, solemn teenage girl. And she says, “Camus says, ‘No one who’s going to die makes life absurd.’ ” And Betsy looks at her and says, “Nobody with any sense would say something that foolish. We’re put on this earth to do a job and each of us gets the time we get to do it.” And when this life is over, and you stand in front of the Lord, while you try telling Him, it was awesome, (Frenchman’s joke), you know, she’s sure and I don’t know all the reasons why she’s a fictional character after all, but she’s sure that when she stands before the Lord, everything’s going to be made right. And that means you can look at this life which is not your home and say, “Well, I’m on my way, I’ll handle it.”
Because someday we are going to get there. We’re going to say I’m home at last. This is the land I was looking for all my life. This is the land I was always looking for and didn’t really know it till now. I belong here.
Let’s pray: Our Father, we thank you for the fact that, maybe the most basic thing that the gospel does is, it promises that we’re going to get home because we are not home. And we ask that you would help us, oh Lord, to revel in that and rejoice in that. But also, since we are not going to experience anything short of continued exile while we’re here, please, Lord, every so often with your Holy Spirit, help us visit that future home. Help us to remember that you are that home and then when we are close to you, we are home. So bring us close to you and give us the assurance that in the Gospel, in Jesus Christ, we know there’s no condemnation for us and we will stand on that day, and life will not be a joke. Life will mean a lot. It’ll mean everything. Father, help us till we get home. Through Jesus in His name, we pray, Amen.




Reconciled and at Peace

Today’s Scripture reading is from Hebrews 9:11–14.

  But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that are now already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made with human hands, that is to say, is not a part of this creation. He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place, once for all by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean. How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God! This is the word of the Lord.


Now, this year, in the next few months, we’re going to be spending a lot of time as a congregation, thinking about our future, thinking about where Redeemer is going, what it’s going to be doing for the next number of years in ministry in New York City. But, a church should never look at its future without making sure its feet are grounded in the Gospel. The gospel has been given once forever to us. And so, for these months in June, or July, excuse me for in January and February, we’re looking at—I know, you wish it was June and July, and I was just being such a pastoral-ly, sensitive person who’s responding to the needs of your heart.
But, as a preacher, I got to tell you the truth, it’s January, and in January and February, we’re looking at the great goods that the gospel brings into our lives. And, the one we’re looking at today is not, here’s a word that theologians use to describe it, though it’s not in the text. And yet this text tells us a lot about it, “reconciliation.” Rom 5 says, “We have peace with God,” we’re reconciled to God. What does that mean? Let’s take a look at this little short passage. It’s short, it’s actually what the logicians call an “A fortiori argument.” That is, it says, “If this is true, then how much more is this true? And if this is true, how much more is this true?” So, one of the ways to understand this argument is to start at the end and work back. It’s actually a pretty simple argument, but its message is, is deeper than the whole universe. And that’s pretty deep. You can go forever practically into the universe at lightspeed and not be anywhere near the boundaries, and yet this is deeper than the universe.
So, let’s work ourselves backwards from 14, 13 through 11, and 12 by doing this. First, we’re going to see a more visible, but lesser problem. Then secondly, a less visible but greater problem. And then thirdly, the solution to it all. So, first of all in verse 14, let’s take a look at it, more visible. But as I’m going to try to show you a somewhat lesser problem, and then later we’ll look at it, in a minute, we’ll look at a more of less visible but greater problem but the more visible but lesser problem is in verse 14, and it’s an uncleansed conscience. How much more then with the blood of Christ, (we’ll get to that), through the eternal spirit offered himself unblemished, (we’ll get to that), cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death.
Now, the problem of a dirty conscience, a conscience that’s not clean. That’s the first thing we’re going to talk about here. What does it mean to have a bad conscience? It means to have a sense that there’s something wrong with us. A kind of deep and profound sense that there’s something wrong with us. Now, understand this, actually, I’m going to turn to maybe what you might think would be a surprising source, Sigmund Freud. And Sigmund Freud wrote a book that many of you probably had to read in Freshman one or something called, Civilization and its Discontents, Civilization and its Discontents, but it’s actually about conscience.
This is what Freud says in that book. He says, the human heart is profoundly egocentric. That in our inmost being, we are profoundly egocentric, incredibly self-centered. But if we pursue what our hearts wanted, we’d all want the same things and we’d fight for each other, maybe to kill each other. So, do you want a civilization or do you want a jungle? I mean, you can have a jungle without self-control. In the jungle, it’s the strong eat the week. Two people want the same thing. They fight for it, the stronger kills the weaker, the stronger gets it, elevated if everybody just went after and pursued the self-centered, egocentric desires of the heart, according to Freud, we can have a jungle, but if you want a civilization, if you want to have a civilization, the price you pay is guilt.
You have to have a conscience. And the conscience is a little internal pain inflictor, that we take into ourselves and we make ourselves feel very, very, very bad. We feel very, very bad about our self-centeredness. And that’s the only way we keep it under control. And so we have a civilization. So that guilt, which is the price you pay for civilization, you couldn’t have civilization.
Now, and when Freud talks about that, you know, the name of the book is Civilization and its Discontents, that the discontent is guilt, see, in German, when it was written in German, originally, the original title, “Discontents” is translated with the German word, “Unbehagen.” And I actually think from what I can tell that the word Discontent in English is actually too weak. Unbehagen means, a deep unease, a malaise. Freud believed our lives were pervaded with guilt. It’s very, very deep. It’s incredibly painful to, on the one hand, wantings and wantings, sort of unavoidable, just wantings, wantings, and I feel terribly guilty about wanting so much.
So, our whole lives are pervaded by guilt. There, it’s everywhere. We have this malaise, we feel uneasy about ourselves, we feel uneasy about life. Now, that can take many point and many forms. The guilt can take many forms. You might overwork, you might try to prove yourself. You might feel anxious or shy, you might be overconfident to overcompensate. But Freud said, “All of that was from this pervasive sense that there’s something wrong with us.” And that comes as the price of living in civilization. Now, some of you might say, and I’m thinking a lot of people in New York would say, oh, come on [inaudible] Freud, and all those other guilt-ridden twentieth century thinkers, like, you know, Albert Camus, and, you know, all the, you know, check off, I mean, all those people always worried about guilt. We’re different. Those people live still in the shadow of religion, and still have felt all this guilt. But we know today, we late-modern or postmodern, more secular, western society, we’re not guilt-ridden like those people were, like Freud was. We know that you decide what’s right or wrong for you, you don’t let other people put a guilt trip on you.
You know, the Woody Allen film, Bullets over Broadway? There’s one place where Rob Reiner is playing a character, an artist. And at one point, the Rob Reiner character says, “Guilt is petty bourgeois crap.” An artist, he says, creates his own moral universe. And of course, in some ways, social media, public discourse, that’s how we talk today. We don’t talk much about guilt, we actually say, guilt is something that people put on you, but you have to say, I have to look into my own heart, I have to decide what I want, and I have to affirm that, I have to accept that and I have to let other people make me feel guilty for that.
You know, guilt is petty bourgeois crap. An artist creates his own modern universe, we should create our modern universes. Now, if Freud was alive today, he would just shake his head, he would say, “You are so incredibly naïve,” and Freud would say, and he’s right, that don’t be so naive as to think you can look into your heart and see your deepest desires and just express them. Oh no, he says, nobody actually has the strength to admit what’s in your heart. Our hearts are so capable of evil, so capable of cruelty, so radically selfish, so dead set on getting what it wants, we would trample on anybody and no human being can look into your heart and actually be honest about the darkness that’s there.
Nobody can be honest about themselves. Your conscience would kill you. It’s bad enough. And Freud is right according to the Bible. You see, what Freud would say, and I think what the Bible says too, there’s overt guilt, and there’s covert guilt. And, let’s look at two pieces of literature to help us understand. In literature, the best example of Overt guilt. Overt guilt means, I’m conscious, I’m guilty, I do not feel forgiven, I’ve done something wrong, don’t know, you know, I can’t seem to, to cleanse myself of it. The great example of that is Lady Macbeth.
Walking around in her sleep, knowing that she took part in the murder of somebody and just racked with guilt, seeing stains on her hand seeing blood on her hands, and walking around saying, “Out, damned spot!” I can’t get it off, I can’t get the stain out.
So, there’s your perfect example of overt guilt. And you know, it’s probably true that in our modern western society, there may be less of that than there used to be. Then, there’s covert guilt. Covert guilt is actually best, I think conveyed by another piece of literature by Franz Kafka, his book, The Trial. It’s a fascinating novel, was unfinished, actually didn’t quite finish. Even though, he wrote a little summary chapter at the end to tell you how the story ends, but the, it’s about a guy named Joseph Kay, who’s arrested and held for trial, and nobody ever tells him what he was arrested for, or what he’s going to be put on trial for. And it’s a perfect example of what I think we are, a perfect example of where we are now.
We don’t have an overt guilt because we tend to say, “Well, I have to decide what is right or wrong for me and I can’t let other people tell me what is right or wrong for me. So, you know, people can’t, you can’t put this guilt on me.” And yet at some other level, we know there’s something wrong. That we’re not right. See, covert guilt. That’s the stuff that Freud says, You’re never going to get rid of that because, you know there’s something wrong with you. Covert Guilt. Why is it some of you just work so hard And you’re always saying, “If I could just get to this level, then I’d cut back,” and you get to that level and you don’t?
Why is it that so many of you exhaust yourself trying to help people and you can’t set up boundaries? You can’t say no to people? Why is it some of you can never confront, even when you want to? Because, you’re so afraid of the displeasure of the person. So, some people, some of you can never confront, no matter even when you ought to. But, why is it that some of you love confronting even when you shouldn’t? Because, you need to show that you’re right. Why are some of you just so much, much, much more agonized over your looks than you want to admit to anybody? What’s going on here? Why is it some of you can’t commit because you’re afraid to let anybody in to see who you are? What’s going on? You know what that is? If you could look, you look the psychology, you call it complexes. You look to Sociology, and you call it alienation or something. But here’s what the Bible says, you have a sense of condemnation that you can’t shake. You have a sense, there’s something wrong with you, but you’re not right, down deep.
You need a cleansed conscience. And so, that’s what I mean by saying, this is a fairly visible, I mean, people talk to us fairly visible. And even though it’s a significant problem, let’s take a look at verse 13, which points out a less visible and even more significant problem. I’m not saying guilt and shame isn’t an important, it’s not significant, it is, but here’s one that’s even more significant, but a lot very less visible to modern people. In verse 13, it talks about the blood of bulls and goats, (we’ll get to that), and the ashes of a heifer, (we’ll get to that), sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean, sanctifying them so that they are outwardly clean. Now, some of you are saying, “Oh, wait a minute, that reminds me of something I hate,” and you know what it is? It’s the book of Leviticus.
Now, you know, by the way, this is late January. And so, there’s probably a few of you, hardy souls. And I, by the way, I want to, I just, I really want to congratulate you, and I want to confirm you, you’ve started the year, saying, “I’m going to read through the Bible.”
And, I’m going to read the Bible every day. I’m going to read right through the Bible. And so, you’re probably, you’re still in Genesis, you know, if you’re reading a chapter a day. Now, this is January, the 24th. So, you’re probably on, maybe Gen 23 or 24; 25 or something. But I just want you to know, Leviticus is right ahead. And many, many, many people who have signed up right through the Bible have died in Leviticus. And the reason it died, you die in Leviticus is actually this very thing. All this talk about ceremonial, physical cleanliness. You get into Leviticus and you can’t believe the, a number of very, very minute and very intricate rituals and regulations about ceremonial cleanness, which was all physical cleanness. You couldn’t go into tabernacle worship, you couldn’t go into worship God, you couldn’t even be in the camp, you know, with the other people of God, if there were all these things wrong with you, if you touch mildew, if you touch the dead body, if you weren’t clean, there’s all this emphasis on physical cleanness and lack of contamination and spotlessness. And, it’s all physical. And when you read it, you’re saying what is going on here? And I think, most people know and you’re right, most people intuitively know somehow it’s symbolic. That is actually not the physical dirt that bothers God so much, but it’s symbolic of something. Maybe you sense that but you wonder why, what’s going on.
Let’s talk about what dirt symbolizes. Let’s talk about it. So, here’s what it symbolizes. For a minute, let’s think about this. Number one. Dirt symbolizes, how do I say it, being relationally repugnant. If you’re going to go to, if you’re going to go to an audition, if you’re going to go to a job interview, if you’re going to have a first date, if you’re going to have an investor, it would be investor meeting, so you’re sitting down with somebody you’ve hopefully invested in your project, or you’re sitting down with somebody you’ve hoped will give you a job or something like that, does it matter how clean you are?
Yeah! If a friend or somebody says, “My goodness! Your breath smells terrible,” you’re not going to go to that interview like that. You’re not going to go if you have body odor, you’re not going to go if you even probably have blemishes on your face. You probably want to do something about that. And you certainly are not going to want to go to that interview smeared with feces excrement, bowel movements, and you’re in garbage probably, probably. Why? Because when you’re standing near somebody who’s smells like that, and when you stand near somebody in which is this overwhelming stench, where the person is, seems to be absolutely contaminated or infected, you know, with past mucus, we just want to get away. Now, it’s a physical thing. It’s a physical, visceral thing. We just know, danger, danger, okay? But of course, the dirt then represents what, relationally repugnant. There’s something pushing me away subjectively, something that’s hurting my ability to even have a relationship with this person.
By the way, dirt doesn’t just mean subjective repugnance, like I can’t stand you emotionally. Dirt also actually means objective. Now, here’s what I mean by that. If you go to the Urban Dictionary, online, and you put in the word, “dirty,” what’s it going to tell you? You’re dirty if you’re carrying illegal drugs, which means, you’re on the wrong side of the law, and right now you could get arrested, if found. Your dirty, in some cases dirty means corrupt. So, you have dirty judges or dirty cops. Or sometimes, dirty actually means illegally obtained goods like dirty money. So, in the urban, colloquial slang, parlance, dirty means you are actually, objectively on the wrong side of the law and you could be arrested, you could be put in jail.
Now, you begin to wonder why Leviticus almost obsesses, and why God said, “I want you to be absolutely clean if you’re going to come in before me.” Here’s what He’s trying to say. There’s a barrier between you and God. And it’s not just on your side, it’s on God’s side. Okay? In other words, we don’t just feel guilty. We are guilty. We don’t just know need to be reconciled to God. God needs to be reconciled us. That first part, we kind of understand, in our culture, but that second part, we don’t at all. And yet, as most of, it’s even more important, let me explain subjectively and objectively, there’s a barrier between you and God, subjectively. What does that mean? All right. Let’s put it like this. Remember, how Freud said that no human being is psychologically capable of admitting the truth about what’s in your heart? That if you actually could see how bad you are, if you could actually see how selfish and cruel you are capable of being, if you could actually see the sinfulness of your heart, Freud says, you would just die, it would be horrible, i would be, you can’t.
Okay, you’d be repulsed. But if there’s a God, and there is, God can see that, and if you’ve ever found yourself not even being able to stand in the presence of someone who smelled, or was contaminated, or there was an incredible stench, and you just said, “I’m sorry, I just I have to get away,” now you have some idea how God looks at every human being because, He’s infinite light and infinite purity and infinite holiness, and we’re not. You know the place where it says, God has a pure eyes that can’t behold iniquity. That’s not, that’s an image. Obviously, God is all knowing, He sees everything. But there’s another sense in which He is relationally repulsed by what is wrong with our hearts. And if that bothers you, let’s talk for a minute about the objective. So, God has a subjective problem with our sin. We can’t just go into His presence spiritually. He’s relationally, repulsed, subjectively, but he’s also there’s an object of barrier also. Remember, I said, the word dirty also means, not just relational repugnance, but legal, legal liability. Something is dirty if it legally could bring you into jeopardy, bring you into jail, bring you into, you know, punishment from the law. And that’s exactly the same thing with God. Let me put these two things together with a kind of painful illustration. Imagine a woman who’s a judge. She’s a good judge. And she has one and only one child, a son. And imagine that that son has gone off the rails, that son has had a terrible life, and now he’s killed somebody and he’s not repentant, and it was premeditated, and he’s on a, he’s a fugitive from justice. But then one night, he shows up in her home and says, “Mother, please take me in, please take me in.”
“Now, of course, you know, you know, hide me.” Now, on the one hand, how’s, how’s mother going to feel? On the one hand, a mother’s love, a father’s love, a parent’s love for a child is there if anything is actually stronger when a child is in trouble. We all know that I hope. And yet on the one hand, there will be a subjective revulsion. You want your child more than anything to be good and right, and to see it.
There’s nothing more revolting than to see someone become evil and wicked and cruel and terrible, but there’ll be nothing more repulsive to see your own child become like that. So, there’d be a sense of what, she was subjectively, you know, revolted by her son. But objectively, here’s what you’d have to say, I’m a judge. I cannot take you and there’s a barrier, there’s a legal barrier between us. I stand for the law. I uphold the law. That’s what I’m about. I couldn’t possibly take, as much as I love you, I couldn’t possibly take you in. There is a legal barrier between you and me. And there’s an emotional barrier between you and me because of your sin. No, you can’t come in.
Now, do you understand? Let me say it again. Most people understand the idea of an unclean conscience. They understand the idea that, that we may feel guilty, but do you know that you are guilty? We may feel I need to reconcile myself to God but don’t you realize that something has to be done to reconcile God to you? Something has to take away the legal barrier and something has to take away the subjective barrier because God does you hope someday that this world would be put right. Wouldn’t be great if there was a judgement day in which justice was done and everything was put right? Don’t you want that? I want that. And that’s only going to happen if there’s a God, who is the ultimate judge. And if he’s the ultimate judge, then he’s going to say the same thing that that woman said to her son. He’s a barrier between us.
No, I’m not. Nope, nope, I’m not talking about any kind of external cleansing at all. All this stuff in the Old Testament, according to the book of Hebrews is spiritual symbolism. So in other words, not literal blood, not literal baptism, not literal water. Now, something else has to happen in order to get rid of the barrier, and all the emphasis on the physical is really pointing to the spiritual. What are we going to do? What’s going to bring it away? What’s going to take it away? What’s going to reconcile us to God and God to us? And the answer is, verse 11, and 12. Actually, the answer is all the way through all four. And you may have noticed, it’s all we have through all four verses. But take a look at verses 11 and 12. That when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that are now already here, when Christ came as the high priest, He went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with human hands. He didn’t come to a physical tabernacle, okay? He went into the holy place, not a physical holy place. But when He entered that most holy place once for all with His own blood, He obtained eternal redemption. He offered Himself unblemished to God. The blood of bulls and goats cannot cleanse from sin, can’t cleanse our conscience, can’t reconcile with the God, but the blood of Jesus Christ can, as our great high priest. What does all that mean? Okay, here we go. I’m taking you back to the book of Leviticus to Lev 16. Sorry! But here’s what you have to see. When, over and over again, it says here, the blood of bulls, the blood of goats and the heifer, you know, and you know what it’s talking about? Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur, on that day.
And only on that day, one day a year, the high priest stood before God in the holy place, the place where God’s Shekinah glory dwelled, His presence. Only on that day, could anybody go back into the holy of holies, and only on that day, the high priest went back there in order to represent the people to be our substitute, to be our mediator, to represent us and to stand before God and to make atonement for our sins, with the blood of bulls and goats and cows and heifers.
And here’s what happened on that day. A week before, the high priest goes into seclusion and prays to try purify his heart. And the day before, the high priest is washed three times, bathed in water. And then finally, the night before as he goes, he’s clothed in white linen, the most pure, the most spotless, you know, and the most, the most clean as it were possible garments and then he represented the people before God. And if you understood all that happened at Yom Kippur, you would then understand why Zachariah, the prophet was so shocked when he saw the vision that was shown to him and which he wrote down in Zech 3 in the Old Testament, and the Old Testament book is Zech 3, we know that Zechariah, the prophet had a vision. And in that vision he saw Joshua who was the high priest, at that time, the high priest of Israel, standing before the Lord in His linen. And when Zachariah looked at it, he knew that was Yom Kippur, and he saw and there was Joshua, but then he looked a little more closely and he was amazed because he was smeared with filth. He was smeared with excrement and feces, he was smeared with garbage. He was absolutely filthy. It was a stench. It was terrible. And Zechariah looked at him and said, How could this be?
How could the heart of all days on Yom Kippur of all people, the whole High Priest, how can he be filthy and dirty before God? And the answer is that God was showing Zachariah, and he’s showing you and me that the external is not what He’s about. That even if you externally make yourself as clean as you possibly can, even if you do everything if you pray if you come to church, even if you come to church on the day of the biggest blizzard of the year, oh, look at me, I’m pretty spiritual, I made it, no matter what you do, externally, to try to cleanse yourself, to try to make yourself right, to try to overcome anything else you’ve done, no matter how hard you work, God sees. God sees the uncleanness, see, God sees the uncleanness. So Zechariah is waiting for God to sort of strike, you know, Joshua dead or fire to come out from the throne or something like that. And instead, God says three things. One, I will take his sin off of him and his filthy garments. Number two, I will put clean garments on him and then number three, in verse 8 of Zech 3:8 he says, and My Servant, the Branch will take away the sin of the land in a single day.
And Zechariah realized that this is a prophecy that we are standing before God completely unacceptable. There’s a subjective and objective barrier between us and our holy God. We cannot know God, we cannot cleanse our own consciences, we can’t cleanse ourselves. And yet, someone will come and do it for us. And of course, this is what we know. It tells you right here, there was another person who came named Joshua. Did you know that Jesus is that, you know, a kind of latinized derivation of the Aramaic Yeshua, which is a derivation of the Jewish Joshua? In other words, centuries later another Joshua showed up. And on the last night of His life, He prayed, He prayed in the Garden of Gethsamane. He prayed and prayed and prayed. Why? Because, the next day, he was going to stand as a High Priest. He was going to stand before God and represent us.
But he did not do that in a beautiful earthly building. Oh no! Here’s what happened. This Joshua, Jesus Christ, He was crucified on a garbage dump. Did you know what Golgotha is? You know what Calvary is? It’s a garbage dump. He was crucified on the garbage, He was crucified in the midst of excrement, feces, bowel movement. And He wasn’t clothed in beautiful garments. He was stripped naked, which was a sign of being shamed. And by the way, was He bathed with water? Yeah. With spit, human spit, they spit on Him. He was made unclean. He was crucified outside the gate. Why? You know, John 17, the night before he died, He said, I have sanctified Myself. I’ve set Myself apart. I’ve gotten ready to be the High Priest to represent the people. He was the only human being that was perfect. He was the only person who wasn’t defiled. He was the only person who’s, who’s, you know, spiritually speaking, His clothes, His life was completely spotless.
So, why is He treated as if He’s garbage? Why is He sent outside the gate? Why is He covered with spit? And why did the Father forsake Him? “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?” Because, He was being treated the way we should be treated. He was taking our uncleanness upon Himself. He was taking our repulsiveness upon Himself. He was paying the penalty for our sins, that objectively has stood between us and God. And you know what that means? Those barriers are going if you believe in Jesus Christ. How does this work out? How does this actually work? Let’s be practical about this. If you believe in Jesus Christ, if you believe that He became filthy, so you could become clean, that He was stripped naked so you can be clothed. And, the Bible’s constantly talking about the fact that you’re clothed in the righteousness of God. Now, we’re going to get to that next week, you know, this series talks about these various goods of the gospel, but they all kind of overlap a little bit. So, we can’t go into it here, but we’re talking about what’s called justification by faith alone. Phil 3 where Paul says, “I want to be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from obeying the law, but a righteousness which is from God, that I received through faith.” That, when I say, Jesus Christ, You’re my high priest, You’re my representative, You’re my mediator, oh, Father, accept me because of Jesus’s sake, at that moment, you’re somehow clothed in His righteousness. God no longer sees the filth. He no longer sees any of the things that you’ve done wrong. He sees you in Jesus Christ, He sees you as an absolute beauty. How does this work out? I’ll tell you this. Everybody in this room has got a conscience problem. Everybody in this room has got overt or covert or both kind of guilts. And what they’re going to tell is, “Oh, my goodness, if you’re struggling with guilt, if you’re struggling with low self-esteem, if you’re struggling with not really feeling good about yourself, if you’re struggling anyway, don’t bring God into it. It’ll just make it worse.” And by the way, in general, bringing religion into it, bringing God in general into it, yeah, you know, actually, it does make it worse. But not if you bring the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in, because if you bring the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, if you bring the gospel into your life, if you bring the Word of God and the grace of God into your life, that’s the only way to deal with what’s wrong with you bit by bit. Look, all the guilt that you have, and shame that you have is partly false and partly true. There’s some things you shouldn’t feel guilty about that you do, because the society, your family, put it on you. And there’s some things that you ought to feel guilty about, which you may not want to admit. But deep down inside, you know, you should be feeling guilty about. Do you understand the difference in false and true guilt?
We’re wrapped with both of them. So for example, what if you’ve got false guilt? What if your family wanted you to be successful and make a lot of money and you know, you’ve disappointed your parents and you feel guilty about that? Let’s get the Word of God. Let’s see what God cares about. Does God care about money? Does God care about success? Or does God care about your heart, your character, your faithfulness? Which means, that’s false guilt. You’re feeling guilty where you shouldn’t feel guilty. Other people have put upon you standards, the NACA standards. So what do you do with the authority of the Word of God? You look at your heart and you say, “Shut up. Stop condemning me. Stop it. Shut up,” with all the authority of the Word of God. 1 John 3 says, “When our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts.”
So, what you say is, “God doesn’t condemn me for this. So, you just shut up.” And that’s how you deal with false guilt. But what about true guilt? That are stuff what you’ve done that is wrong and you know is wrong, and maybe you’ve asked forgiveness and you’ve repented in the past and you still feel guilty, your heart is still condemning you, you know what? You can take the grace of God and say, “Shut up.” Why? Because, the Bible says, n Christ Jesus, “There’s no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.” There is a great hymn that goes like this: Well, may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all and thousands more. Jehovah, knoweth none. Let the accuser roar, whether it’s the devil, or my heart, or my conscience, let the accuser roar, of sins that I have done. I know them all and thousands more. But my Lord, because I’m in Jesus Christ, my Father knoweth none.
So, you can take the Word of God to false guilt and say, “Shut up,” to your heart when it’s condemning you. You can take the grace of God, to your heart when it’s condemning you and say, “Shut up.” And finally you get that peace. Look at Paul, look at Paul. He was a murderer; he killed people. How did he live with himself? How did he have the confidence to go out and talk to people about the gospel? You can see it. Go to Rom 8 where he says, “Who shall bring a charge against God’s people?” It is Christ who died, who was raised again, who has passed through the heavens, who is interceding for us. Nothing can separate us from the love of God, says Paul in Rom 8. I am persuaded he says that neither death nor life nor angels nor principalities or powers or the things present or anything that come, no height, nor depth or any other thing in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. He is like our high priest. That’s how I have my confidence. That’s how I put my conscience at rest. Hey, you know, one of my favorite fairy tales, but it’s not very well known, It’s not a Grimm’s fairy tale, it’s not a Hans Christian Andersen fairytale, it’s a English British Scottish fairy tale, some kind of, called, The Black Bull of Norroway. It exists like all those fairy tales in several forms, but here’s the essence of it. There was a prince. And he went into battle and he killed somebody that he regretted killing. And he felt horribly guilty and terribly bad. And he came back, and he noticed that his tunic was stained with blood, and he tried to clean the blood off the tunic and it wouldn’t come out, the stain wouldn’t come out. It’s a fairy tale. And the tunic represented his conscience. It represented his heart. He’d been wounded, he wounded himself by what he’d done wrong.
And he couldn’t get the stain out. So, he made a proclamation and he said to everyone in the kingdom. He says, “Any young maiden, any young woman who can get this thing out of my tunic must be my true love. And I will marry her and we will reign over the kingdom forever.” And by the ways, you see that what psychological sense this fairy tale makes? Because, he knew, he says, “If there was any girl that could get the stain out, she would be my true love.” And that’s what I’m going to need. I’m going to need true love in order to deal with this self hate that my wrong actions have inflicted on my own heart. Only my true love will be able to heal me of that self hate and cleanse my conscience. So, if she can get the stain out of my tunic, she can get the stain out of my heart. And of course, what ends up happening is this, every girl in the kingdom, every young woman in the kingdom tries and fails, then, you know, typically, great fairy tale story. There’s this one poor girl, she’s a servant girl. She’s new to town. She has no idea about, she has no idea about the offer. She sees this whole bunch of laundry that she has to do laundry, that’s her job. And she sees this tunic with this stain on and she says, “Okay, well, I guess I better do that too.” And she just does all the laundry including the prince’s tunic and puts it in; she gets the stain out, wasn’t even trying.
And she’s his true love and how they made and they find each other is part of the story, but here’s the point. Jesus is your true love. Jesus can get the stain out.
Jesus says, “I’m the only one that can do that. And therefore, I’m the only one that can heal you of your self-hate that you’ve inflicted on yourself and all this stuff that Freud said was intractable. No, no, it’s not not with me in your life. With the Word of God and the grace of God through the gospel of Jesus Christ, Jesus says, “I can take it out. You don’t have to live always recriminating yourself, you don’t have to pay that price anymore.” Everybody in this room, struggles with overt and covert guilt. Jesus is your true love. He’s your high priest. He cleanses everything. Bring this truth and bring Jesus in the middle of your life and let it change everything.
Let us pray: Thank you, Father for giving us your gospel and thank you for all the innumerable amazing goods and benefits that come into our life and one of them is reconciliation, that you now, you now, you embrace us, you love us, you’re reconciled to us. Thank you, Lord, that You sent Jesus Christ, our true love, to cleanse our consciences and break the barriers between us. And we pray that we would begin to live the kind of lives of joy, of peace, of deep peace that comes from a clear conscience. Help us Lord to do this through Jesus. It’s in His name that we pray. Amen.




Bought Out of Slavery

Scripture reading comes from the book of Romans 3:22–31.

  This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. There is no difference between Jew and Gentile, for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus. God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood—to be received by faith. He did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his forbearance, he had left the sins committed beforehand and punished—he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus. Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded. Because of what law? The law that requires works? No, because of the law that requires faith. For we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law. Or is God the God of Jews only? Is he not the God of Gentiles too? Yes, of Gentiles too, since there is only one God, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith. Do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? Not at all! Rather, we uphold the law. The word of the Lord.


So Hi. I’m reminded of Henry V in the Battle of Agincourt when he looked at everyone and he said, We few, we happy few, we band of brothers and sisters! So, we have a great thing to do tonight. We’re taking a look at one of the passages that one was just read to you that Martin Luther thinks is the greatest single place in the Bible that explains the gospel of Jesus Christ.
He might be right because it’s talking about three great gospel words. One of them actually doesn’t appear in this translation, but I’ll explain it to you. The three great gospel words are “redemption,” “propitiation,” and “justification.” If you take a look at the heart of this passage in verse 24, it says, “We all need redemption.” In verse 25, it says, “And in response to that God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement,” and the older word was propitiation, I’ll get back to that, and then at the, near the bottom, it says, “as a result, we receive justification.” Now, those are three tremendous great gospel words. What’s our problem? What do we need? Redemption. What does God do about it? Propitiation. And what do we get as a result? Justification. Three tremendous gospel words, and it’s ridiculous that I’m going to try to unpack all three of them now.
On the other hand, you guys don’t have anything to do afterwards. I know you don’t. So, we could stay here for hours. But I probably won’t do that. Instead, I’d like to, let’s unpack each of these words, verse 24, “We’ve all sinned, we’ve all fallen short of the glory of God.” And therefore it says, “We need the redemption that comes through Jesus Christ.” Now, the word redemption means to be bought out of slavery. It means, a price is paid to buy us out of slavery. And we might say, well, you know, we don’t have slavery around here. Well, you have to understand that the word redemption is an economic word. And its background is in ancient times, there was no bankruptcy law. So that, you fell into debt and you couldn’t pay your debt and you were in violation of the law because you had made legal contract to pay and now you can’t pay your debt, what did you do? Well, sometimes you would lose your land. And you’d have to farm it as a tenant farmer so you pay the debt. Sometimes you did become a slave and what we would call an indentured servant today, but, see, modern people today don’t have, we don’t have debtors’s prisons. We don’t have indentured servant-hoods. So, we say, “Well, we don’t have those things.” And yet, any of you who have been under a huge weight of debt, a huge load of debt, you know, that your freedom is compromised, always by debt, your freedom is always compromised. There’s many things you can’t do unless you get that debt off of you. And, if you can’t do it, if you just don’t have the wherewithal to, to pay your debt, there’s no hope for you and you will never be free unless someone come from outside and pays that debt for you. Now Paul, of course, is using, you know, an economic word, but he’s using it to apply to all human beings. He said, we all need redemption. So he’s not talking at this point about the economic, he’s talking about the spiritual moral. He’s saying that all human beings need to be redeemed. How so? Well, the whole Bible talks about this, and I will just briefly summarize, that’s all I can do.
We need to be redeemed from guilt. All human beings know at some level, we’re not living the way we ought to live. You know, in ancient times, people were guilt racked, and supposedly, now in modern times, we’re not. You know, we say, “Hey, I have to decide what is right or wrong for me. You can’t let your guilt trip on me.” And yet, all human beings at some deep level, know that we’re not who we should be. We’re not the people we should be. We all have a sense of condemnation of some kind. And, you know, Samuel Johnson, the Great British writer, in his biography, we’re told, was eighteenth century, now that when he had been a little boy, when he’d been a boy, I don’t know how little he was, when he was a boy, his father, who ran a bookstall on the Uttoxeter, public square, Uttoxeter, was an English town, and his father on certain days of the week, ran a bookstall, he sold books. And one day he came to Samuel and said, “I can’t be there, I want you to go there for two hours. Make sure nobody steals the books, you know, people pay for the books. I want you to attend my bookstall at the Uttoxeter market for two hours,” and he never went.
And that always bothered him all of his life. But as he got older, now, this is after his father was dead, after he got older, the memory of what he did there, became symbolic. It symbolized all the ways in which he had failed to be a good son. But not only that, it started to symbolize all the ways he hadn’t been a good person, all the ways in which he failed to be the person he should have been. And it’s a very famous incident, infact if you go to Uttoxeter’s public, you know, Town Square, you actually see a little plaque there or a monument there. One day in the driving rain, his guilt got to him in a driving rain. He walked to the marketplace and stood in the place where decades before his father’s bookstore used to be and stood there in the pouring rain, bareheaded for two hours, kind of penance, to deal with his guilt, didn’t work. We need redemption. I mean, once we know we haven’t done what we should do, you can’t go back somehow. I mean, there’s no way to pay for that. We need redemption, we need, we need to be freed from our guilt. We also, one more thing we actually need to be freed from, what I’ll call, heart slave masters.
Now, think about this. Because we all have a sense that we do not live as we ought to live, we try to find ways to, to shore up our sense that we do deserve to be here, that we are earning our way in a sense that we that we are significant, we are worthwhile. So, for example, Sydney Pollack, who was a great, you know, Hollywood producer, and director, he made a lot of films. Near the end of his life when he was very sick, and he’s, keeps wanting to make films and people said, “Why do you need to keep making films? You know, you’ve made great films, you’ve won Oscars, you know, why do you have to keep going?” He actually said, and at one point, he actually said, “Every time I finish a picture, I feel I’ve earned my stay for another year or so.” He wasn’t joking. In other words, unless I make a really good picture that really helps people and really does good, then I feel like okay, I’ve earned my stay. You remember Harold Abrams in Chariots of Fire, and he’s trying to get the gold medal in the Olympics and somebody asked him, “Why are you working so hard for athletic glory?” And he says, (he was running the 100 yard dash), so, he said, “When that gun goes off, I have ten seconds to justify my existence.” It’s the same thing Sydney Pollack is trying to say, “I do what I do to justify, I mean, it’s my justification; it’s, I don’t just make movies. It makes me feel that I’m okay that I belong here. I’m not just running, you know, the race, I’m doing it not just because it’s a good thing I needed, It’s my justification, It’s my way of dealing with this deep down sense that I’m not what I should be. But let me tell you what happens if you take your job or you take a romantic relationship.
And that’s not just like those things, somethingstimes aren’t good things. They become your justification. They become, “Why I feel that I belong here?” They become, my sense that this is why I can respect myself as why other people should respect me because I’m this or I have this because this person loves me, because I’ve accomplished this in life, because I have this career, because I’ve made this much money. When you make those things your justification, here’s what I want you to consider. If you displease a boss, what can your boss do? Reprimand you? Yeah, fire you? Yeah. But if you displease a slave master, what can a slave master do?
He can beat you to a pulp. He has no boundaries, see, there’s no boundaries on a slave master. If you don’t do, if you break up with somebody and you’re sad, that’s one thing if you break up with somebody and want to throw yourself off a bridge, If you don’t do well in your career, and you’re sad, that’s one thing if you don’t do well in your career, and you feel like I’ve got no meaning in life, I feel like I feel terrible, I’m hating hating myself, I’m beating myself up, you know what that is. Your career or that relationship, these things, they’re your slave masters. You need to be redeemed. But you see, they go together. Unless we’re redeemed from our guilt, we can’t be redeemed from the slave masters that run our lives. So for in, and I could go on. The Bible actually says, your bodies need to be redeemed because they’re actually enslaved to decay and to death and someday God has to redeem our body.
So we need redemption. All right, well then, what does God do? Secondly, verse 25. God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement through the shedding of His blood, and I said—if you go to the older translations, here it translates a particular Greek word, sacrifice of atonement, but it’s actually only one word, and it’s the word hilastērion,. And the older translations were translated, “God presented Christ as a propitiation through the shedding of his blood.” Now, the word propitiation, I understand why they didn’t use the word. It’s partly because it’s actually an old word, an old English word and not that many people use it anymore. So, it’s not very well known. But you can, you know, you can almost parse it a little bit and see the word “pro” and “pity” in there. Propitiation always means just turn aside someone’s wrath, someone’s angry, someone’s furious. Propitiate means you satisfy the person, you pacify, you turn away the wrath. This is saying that Jesus Christ perpetuated the wrath of God by shedding His blood, the wrath of God on sin, the wrath of God on you and me was coming down, and Jesus Christ on the cross, shed His blood and propitiated the wrath of God.
Now, that is very, very—what I just said, is an incredibly unpopular doctrine. I could read, I don’t have time to do, I could read all kinds of people who say that this is primitive, this is terrible, this is awful, a blood thirsty God, a God who needs Jesus Christ’s blood in order for Him to forgive us, this is horrible, this is terrible. If there is a God, He has to be a God of love. We don’t want a God of wrath, a God of violence. This is horrible. People hate this doctrine. So what do we have to say? I’d like you to believe it. I think it’s one of the, I have to say, it’s the most practically precious doctrine that in my life, over the years of almost everything that I see here, it just it astonishes me, it’s changed my life. But here’s now what I think in order to understand it, especially for contemporary people we do record it, it does bother us. And it won’t make sense to the doctrine that Christ’s shed blood propitiates the wrath of God. That doctrine will not make sense unless I hit this to this unless you understand four background truths. There’s four truths that you have to understand if the doctrine and propitiation of the wrath of God is going to make sense. You know what those four are? Yeah, we can go on a long time. But I don’t want to. Here’s what the four are. Number one, you have to understand that great love makes you capable of great anger. That’s the first thing.
So to say, Oh, I don’t want an angry God, I want a loving God, makes no sense when you realize that if you really love someone, you can get very angry at them if they’re destroying your lives. If you love something, you’ll get angry at anything that’s destroying it. Right? And that’s the first thing you just have to understand. If God really loves the world He made and He really loves the people He made, then anything He sees that’s destroying it, He’s going to get angry at. Some years ago, I read an article by a woman who was wrestling with this idea of the wrath of God until she realized she had a friend who was really doing stupid things, really ruining her life, really being impulsive, really being selfish, dabbling with drugs doing bad things. And she was furious with her friend and she realized she was furious with her because she loved her so much, that if she didn’t love her so much, she wouldn’t be anywhere near that angry and then she thought about God and she said, anger isn’t the opposite of love, Hate is.
And the final form of hate is indifference. Did you hear that? The opposite of, you know, anger isn’t the opposite of love. You know, because love makes you angry, angry at the evil or the sin that’s ruining what you love. Anger isn’t the opposite of love, hate is and the final form of hate is indifference. You don’t want a God who’s indifferent to evil, any sin. And another writer puts it like this: “Any God who’s not angry at evil and injustice isn’t worthy of my worship.” And that leads to the second. The first truth you have to understand is, great love makes you capable of anger, great anger. So to say, I don’t want an angry God, I want a loving God makes no sense. The second truth is that God is a judge. And that God’s anger is not crankiness. It’s a subtle, judicial opposition to evil. If you were, if you went into a court of law, and you saw a man found guilty of robbery, you know, and, okay, now it’s time for the sentence. What if the judge at the time of the sentence, you know, the man gets up to receive a sentence, what if the judge jumped over the bench and started beating the man, “I’m so angry at you,” and hitting him with his gavel? I’m sure someday that’s going to happen on television, now it’s television court scene, I’m sure that’s going to happen. They’ll help the ratings. You know, you’d look and say, “Oh, that’s not the kind,” that does, that’s not what you want.
You don’t want a judge who’s just losing his temper, nor do you want a judge who’s indifferent. You don’t want a judge who says, “Oh, well, yeah, you broke the law, but are you sorry?” “Yes, I’m sorry Judge.” “Well, then just try not to rob people in the future. That wouldn’t be any good. What you want is the judge to have real indignation, real anger, toward the injustice, toward the hurt that this man had done. But all that anger would be channeled through enforcing the law, and because God is a judge, remember what I just read, the one guy said, “If God is not a God, who is angry at evil and injustice, He’s not worthy of my worship.” Do you want someday for everything to be put right in the world? someday? The answer that the I hope you say, yes, that’ll only happen if God’s the judge. And God’s wrath is simply gets settled judicial opposition to evil, which is what you’d want, not crankiness, not, you know, not getting, not temper. The third thing you have to understand is what Dietrich Bonhoeffer said, which is, forgiveness is always a form of suffering. Forgiveness is a form of suffering. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, you know, the guy who died opposing the Nazis, was a Lutheran minister opposing the Nazis in World War II, died for it, he wrote in one of his letters, forgiveness is a form of suffering. When I first read it, I thought, that’s really weird, but no, it’s not. If someone wrongs you, the most the most satisfying thing, if someone wrongs you, is to go pay them back. They’ve hurt your reputation, then I’m going to kill their reputation and that maybe I get my reputation back a little bit. You hurt my good name, I’ll destroy your good name, and that’ll help me or you made me unhappy, I’m going to make you even more unhappy, and that’ll make me feel a little more satisfied. So in other words, if someone wrongs you, one things you could do is pay them back, really pay them back. And that’ll be satisfying, in a sense, but as maybe you’ve heard just say that before, but if someone does evil to you, and you pay them back real ventually pay them back, you know what happens, the evil wins, the evil wins.
Because you become more cruel and mean, and probably the perpetrator will probably not see the error of his or her ways, but we’ll come back at you and then you know, there’ll be more fighting, and everybody will get involved and people will take sides, evil wins because you are paying back for the evil. You say, Okay, well, what should I do? You should forgive, but get this. If someone wrongs you, it always is pretty satisfying to pay them back. If you forgive it, you’re suffering. In other words, you’re bearing the cost. They hurt your reputation and you forgive them for that, then you bear the loss to reputation. They stole some happiness from you, and you forgive them, then you bear that loss. When someone sins against you, it creates a debt, you can make them pay it or you can pay it, but the debt doesn’t go away, one or the other. And if you pay it, if you forgive, forgiveness is always a form of suffering.
And now you see something about the cross, do you know? Why does Jesus have to die? Why does he have to shed His blood? If we human beings have done wrong, and we have, and by the way, standing out in the rain bareheaded is not going to deal with it. Well, then how can God, can He just overlook it? No, He’s a judge. And He has settled opposition to evil, that’s his wrath. Well, then can He just forgive? No, because, if He’s going to forgive us and much of our sins are against Him, the only way He can forgive us is if He bears the cost instead of making us bear the cost. And when Jesus Christ goes to the cross, He’s bearing the cost for sin. Ah, but somebody says, my goodness, it’s just still seem so awful, to the idea that Jesus Christ has to shed His blood to appease the wrath of the Father. Whenever the Father’s angry at us and Jesus Christ has to go in at peace, that’s blood-thirsty, that’s terrible. It’s like the ancient gods. And I just don’t like it. But that, did you notice something? Look at the grammar everybody. God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement through the shedding of His blood. It doesn’t say, Christ presented His blood to propitiate the wrath of God. It says, God …, what does that mean? And here’s where we get into that wonderful, mind boggling doctrine that I will show you, though it always boggles the mind. It’s incredibly useful. It’s called the doctrine of the Trinity, everybody. And the doctrine of, that Jesus Christ propitiates the wrath of God, through His shedding of His blood will not make sense unless you understand the doctrine of the Trinity. The Trinity is not that there’s three Gods up there who just happen to like each other.
The Trinity is just one God and inside that one God, that one God exists in three persons. And what that means and it tells you right here, is not that the Father is angry, and therefore Jesus Christ comes and appeases the Father’s anger. What it’s actually saying is God Himself in Jesus Christ goes to the cross and pays the price, absorbs the suffering of divine justice Himself. It is not just Jesus, it’s, who goes to the cross? The God goes to the cross in Jesus Christ, which means God is substituting Himself for us. John Stott in his great book, On The Cross of Christ, says, here’s what you have to understand. Sin is you substituting yourself for God, putting yourself where only God deserves to be in charge of your life. Sin is you substituting yourself for God, putting yourself where God deserves to be in charge of your life. But salvation is God substituting Himself for you, putting himself where only you deserved to be on that cross, taking the penalty.
See, it is an ancient story, remember Agamemnon, in the Illiad, Agamemnon? The gods are angry at him, and they won’t give him fair wins to get to Troy. So, he sacrifices his daughter Iphigeneia. He slays her, and sacrifices her and then, oh, then the gods will give him fair wins. And some people say, see, that’s just like the Christian God, that’s just like Christianity, blood-thirsty, terrible.
No, it’s the other way around. It’s the opposite of barbarism. It’s the opposite of paganism. In that story, poor human beings have to put up the blood to appease cranky gods. But in the Gospel, God Himself comes and shares His own blood. It says that in the book of Acts, Acts 20, God purchased the church with His own blood. God’s sheds His own blood to appease the wrath, the divine wrath, and pay the debt of justice and free us, and redeem us. So, if you understand those four things, suddenly you begin to realize the propitiation of the wrath of God, by the blood of Jesus Christ is what redeems. It has to be that way.
Any God who’s not angry at injustice is not worthy to be worshipped. Any forgiveness entails suffering. And so, God Himself, shed His own blood to purchase our salvation. Now, finally, what does that bring us to? Well, it tells us here and that is several times, it says, He justifies now those who have faith in Christ. The law requires faith. We’ve maintained that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law; were justified without earning it. It’s a gift. Now, what is all this? What does that mean?
When you and I hear the word, justification, that Jesus died on the cross so we can be justified almost always, immediately, we think of pardon and forgiveness, and that’s fine. That’s a wonderful thing and it’s part of it, sure! Jesus died on the cross so God could forgive us. Yes, but justification is much more than forgiveness. Listen everybody, justification is much more than forgiveness.
Marcus alone [inaudible], a Christian writer puts it like this. He says, “To speak forgiveness is to say, you may go, you have been let off of your penalty, but to speak of justification is to say, you may come, you are welcome to all my love and presence.” See the difference? as wonderful as it is, forgiveness is negative and negative. It’s saying, you’re no longer liable to penalty, you may go. You’re free, no more penalty. But justification is the bestowal of a status. It’s not just you no longer liable. It’s a bestowal of a new status with incredible rights and privileges and benefits attached to it. You may come, and now you may be in my presence. How do we understand this? Well, here’s how I’d understand it. Some years ago, I was watching a TV show that was a detective show, and one particular episode was about an old man in his eighties, broken down. He’s an ex-marine. And it turns out for the show, this is a fiction piece, by the way. It turns out that the man was charged with allegedly doing some crime when he was in marine. And so, the military police were out to find him, they were trying to track him down. They’re trying to find him. And finally, a scene comes where they’ve tracked him down, they find him, they come up to him. And these two great big MPs (military police) are looking down at him and they’re snarling and they’re yelling at him, you know, stay, you know, put out your hand, your hands up, you know, and they get out their handcuffs and they’re ready to, this poor broken out man, they’re ready to take them into custody. But the little man has a friend next to himand the friend reaches over, pulls aside the man’s tie, opens the top button and shows what he’s wearing underneath. And you know what it is? That for the story’s sake, that years ago on the field of battle in World War II, he had done an act of incredible bravery. And as he pulls this aside, the military police see that he’s wearing the Congressional Medal of Honor. And suddenly, their faces change, their posture changes. They drop their handcuffs, and they, you know, they snap to attention, and they salute. It’s very moving and very poignant. And it makes perfect sense. What were they saluting? Not really the man. Maybe, it doesn’t matter to them was he a criminal? Was he?
It doesn’t matter. What are they saluting? They’re saluting, they are honoring the medal because the medal represents all the people who had shed their blood on the field of battle for decades and centuries. For our freedom, yeah, our freedom. Yes. How so? Ever see the series, The Man in the High Castle? It’s a science fiction theory series about what would have happened if in World War II we’d lost. What would happen if the opponents, the enemy had gotten the atomic bomb first, which they could have. And what would happen if they dropped an atomic bomb on Los Angeles and on New York, what would have happened? What could have happened?
We would’ve lost our freedom. So, the people who are out there fighting, shedding their blood heroically, what were they doing? They were doing it for us. They were doing it to purchase our freedom. And that medal represented all that honor, all that heroism, all that glory, and that’s why, they weren’t saluting him, they were saluting the metal, which was on his chest, and they were giving him that kind of deference, that kind of honor because he had that medal on his chest. Now, think about this.
When Jesus Christ went to the cross, everything about the crucifixion had the trappings of shame. He was stripped naked. You don’t have to execute somebody naked, being stripped naked. It was a mark of shame. It was a way of shaming him. He was crucified outside the gate. He was crucified at Calvary, Golgotha, dump, you know, a garbage dump. He was experiencing the ignominy, He was taking the dishonor, He was taking the shame that we deserve. Oh, but wait a minute. Think about it for a second. He had the ultimate honor in the universe, but He voluntarily gave it up and came and went to the cross. If anything that makes Him worthy of greater honor than He had before, if that’s possible, or He had this incredible glory, but He emptied Himself of His glory, and He became small and He became killable and vulnerable, and He lost all of His glory and He took on the shame, but if anything that makes Him worthy of greater glory, if that’s possible, what does Jesus Christ deserve? What kind of award, what kind of medal does He deserve? Because on that battlefield, He shed His blood. Look at that heroism, look at that incredible bravery. Look what He faced. What kind of medal does He deserve for that heroism, for that shedding of His blood for our freedom? What does He deserve? I don’t know. But here’s the gospel, everybody.
When you believe in Jesus Christ, the moment you believe in Jesus Christ, it’s not just that your sins are put on Him and your shame is put on Him, but that His righteousness, His glory, everything He deserves. Yes, it was pinned on you, all of His medals are pinned on you. It’s not just that he’s treated as we deserve. So he takes our penalty.
But then in Christ, we are treated as He deserves. All those medals, all those awards are pinned on us and God salutes and the universe salutes in Him. That’s what it means when it says, we are righteous in Him. This is the reason why Richard Hooker, the great Anglican writer from the eighteenth century, put it like this in describing the doctrine of justification by faith. Listen to this. He says, “Let it be counted as folly or frenzy or fury whatsoever. This is our comfort in wisdom and we care for no knowledge in the world, but this, that God has made Himself our sin, that we might be made His righteousness. We are in the sight of God the Father, as is the very Son of God Himself. Let it be counted as folly or frenzy or fury whatsoever. This is the only thing in the world, this knowledge, I care for nothing else in the world, but to know this that God made Himself sin so we could be made His righteousness, that when God looks at me, when God the Father looks at me, He sees me in Jesus Christ. And I am an absolute beauty to him.
Justification? Now listen. Two implications and a story, and we’re done. The first implication is, what does it mean to be a Christian? When I ask people, “Are you a Christian?” Sometimes they say, “I’m trying.” So, a little bit like me asking, “Are you married or are you single?” And you say, “Well, I’m trying to be married?” Well, in one sense, maybe Okay, “I’m after somebody, and I don’t, she hasn’t said yes,” maybe, that’s what you mean. But, I mean, honestly, if I say, “Are you married or not,” you say, well, you look, yes or no, right. I mean, you need to have a marriage or a wedding service, there were vows, there was some minister just the piece or not, you know, there’s one second in which you’re not married, there’s another second in which you are. It’s not a process. In the same way, to become a Christian, yes, of course, we want to be like Jesus. In a certain sense we’re all trying to be Christians. But you either are a Christian or you aren’t. You’re either justified or you’re not. You either had this incredible status bestowed on you, the medals have been pinned on you, and your shame has been put on Him, or it hasn’t been. It’s one or the other.
Do you understand that? So, if you don’t understand that, you don’t understand the gospel. But here’s the other thing, if you do understand it, and if you make this yours—some years ago, in fact, I know how many years ago, it was right at around the time of the great recession in 2008–2009. I was at a men’s retreat. And there was a man there who got up, and he had been converted about three years before at that retreat, I think. So he, I mean, it was an annual retreat. So, three years before, so he gets up at this retreat 2008-2009 and this is what he said. He said, He says, “I work in a field that used to be called Wealth Management. But now it’s more better to be called wealth survival.” And he said, “This year, I have lost an enormous amount of money. And I’m here to tell you that I’ve never been happier in my life. If the great recession that happened two years ago, when my justification was still in my performance, I know where the vodka bottle is, and I would have driven myself right into the ground.” But what changed? You see, his career was just, it was just a job now. It wasn’t his justification.
What was his justification now is Jesus’s justification. In a sense, he was saying, what Paul says in Galatians, a little bit later in Galatians. He says, may I never boast except in the cross of Jesus Christ, my Lord, through whom the world is crucified to me and I to the world. May I never boast. You see, where is boasting? It is excluded. Ah, but not, if you boast in Jesus Christ, that is to say, if you say, my identity is in him, my justification is in him, not in anything else, you know what that means? The world is crucified to you and you to the world. Who cares what people think? Who cares what kind of, how you did in your portfolio this year?
It’s not your justification anymore. See, the only two eyes in the universe whose opinion counts, looks at you in Jesus Christ and sees you as more precious than all the jewels that lie beneath the earth. So who cares? The world is just, look, that kind of identity, that kind of imperviousness to ups and downs, that kind of balance, that kind of buoyancy, that kind of joy can be yours if you understand the gospel words, redemption, propitiation, justification. Well, people are very, very, in this professional place like New York, people are incredibly offended by the idea that you got to be saved through the blood of Jesus.
In 1955, Billy Graham went to Cambridge, and to preach in the evenings at great St. Mary’s at the Cambridge University of Cambridge. Before he got there, there was a lot of indignation on the part of people in the London Times or articles or there were, (Pardon me) there were letters saying, “How can this American fundamentalist come and speak to our best and brightest about the blood of Jesus that, you know, and which is very offensive? We don’t believe in that. Our best and brightest aren’t going to be in any way impressed by this particular preacher.” So Billy Graham was a bit intimidated, by the way you can read about this in the biography, he was a bit intimidated by it.
So the first few couple of nights he was preaching there, he quoted a lot of existentialist philosophers and intellectuals and things like that, and that’s not Billy Graham. And he realized he just wasn’t getting any traction with with the listeners, and he got down on his knees and says, Tonight Lord, I’m going to preach the cross. I’m just going to preach the cross.” And this is an account by somebody who was there. He says, “I’ll never forget that night. That was Wednesday night at queen St. Mary’s in Cambridge. He says, I was in a totally packed chancel sitting on the floor, with the religious professor of divinity at Cambridge sitting on my one side and other faculty members sitting on the other. These were good men, but completely against the idea that we needed salvation from sin by the blood of Jesus Christ. But dear Billy, that night, got up and began at Genesis and went right through the whole Bible and talked about every single sacrifice. The blood was just flowing all over everywhere, for three quarters of an hour. Both my neighbors, these faculty members were terribly embarrassed by this crude proclamation of the blood of Christ. It was everything he disliked and everything they dreaded, but at the end of the sermon, to everyone’s shock, four hundred young men and women stayed to commit their lives to Christ. Back when the student body was an eight thousand people, this man says, “I remember many years later meeting a young man who was a minister, a young minister.” And he asked, “Where did Christian things begin with you?” He says, “Oh, Cambridge 1955.” “Really, when?” “Wednesday night, last night of Billy Graham.” “Well, how did it happen?” And he said, “All I remember is that I walked out of Great St. Mary’s that night, for the first time in my life thinking, ‘Christ really died for me.’ ” There’s power in the blood. Power for you.
Let’s pray: So Father, these great gospel words, show us what they mean. So, they can save us, they can change us. If we understand and grasp what you’re offering us in them, and those of us who have, we can spend the rest of our lives exploring them, and that’s what we’ve done tonight. Thank you for your redemption. Thank you for the propitiation. And thank you for our justification. Make us the kind of people who live in accordance with these great truths. We pray in Jesus name, Amen.




Hope in the Face of Death

The Scripture reading this morning is from 1 Thessalonians 4:13–18.

  Brothers and sisters, we do not want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death, so that you do not grieve like the rest of mankind, who have no hope. But we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, and so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him. According to the Lord’s word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord will certainly not proceed those who have fallen asleep. But the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. After that, we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will be with the Lord for forever. Therefore, encourage one another with these words. The word of the Lord.


So, as BJ [inaudible] was saying, over the next, coming weeks, the coming weeks, we’re going to be looking at our future, what we Redeemer hopes to accomplish in the city over the next few years. And the vision is very, very big. And, it’s extraordinarily exciting. And we will be talking about that, but we, no church should ever talk about the future without making sure that its feet are grounded right now in the biblical historic gospel that Jesus Christ gave to His disciples and apostles, and who then gave it to us. And what we’ve been doing for a number of weeks now, (we’re almost done with a series but not quite), is we’re looking at what we’re calling the gospel goods. Those unimaginable benefits that the gospel of Jesus Christ brings to us now, the one we’re looking at today is, I don’t know if you can even talk like this, but perhaps, perhaps, one of the greatest of the benefits, there is an enemy. And we all have to face it. We do face it, we will face it.
How do we have the courage to face it? How will we have the hope to face it? And the great enemy of the human race is death. And this is a pretty young congregation still, but no matter how young you are, no matter how your life’s been going up to now, I can say, without fear of contradiction, or being disproved, that there is a lot of death in your future, a lot of death in your future. And therefore, you severely need what this text talks about. It talks about hope in the face of death. So, let’s ask the text three questions. One is, why do we need hope in the face of death? Secondly, how can we get hope in the face of death? And thirdly, if we have it, how do we use it and increase it in our life? How do we use it to make our life stronger? So why do we need hope in the face of death? How do we get hope in the face of death? And how do we use it in our lives, in our hearts? So, first of all, why don’t we need hope, in the face of death? Take a look at verse 13. “Brothers and sisters,” Paul says writing to a group of Christians, “… we don’t want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death, so that you do not grieve like the rest of mankind who have no hope.” The reason we need hope in the face of death is that we, is, this is a universal problem. In fact, when Paul says, and we’ll get back to the way he says it in a little bit, so, we don’t want you to grieve like the rest of mankind who have no hope—everybody, everybody in the world struggles to have hope in the face of death. Everybody does. These people obviously have recently lost loved ones, might have been family, might have been friends, and they’re struggling. And he says, I want to help you in that struggle, because everyone in the world struggles often without success, to have hope in the face of death.
Now, how then do people try to find hope in the face of death? And I’m going to say that there’s at least two main ways, these are probably your two biggest, most often seen alternatives. None of these are the Christian way, but there’s two alternative ways that human beings use in order to try to have hope in the face of death. The first is what I call, The Stoic Way. Now, not just talking about the fact, there was a Greek School of philosophers, the Stoics, but the stoic way is actually not only the most, the more ancient way that all cultures and societies tried to equip people to face death, but even in our society up until maybe thirty, or forty years ago, this was still the dominant approach. And what’s the stoic way? Well, perfect example of it is in Homer, the Iliad, where one character says to another character, “Bear up and don’t give into anger, grief, nothing will come of sorrowing for your son, nor will you raise him up before you die. Bear up, don’t give into angry, grief, nothing will come of sorrowing for your son.” So, this approach acknowledges that death is terrible and horrible, and that the normal, infact inevitable feelings you will have in the face of death are anger and grief, despondent sorrow, anger and grief. But what is the Stoic approach? Shut down as emotions. Keep a stiff upper lip. Be strong. Don’t give into those emotions, right? Don’t give in to them. So the Stoic approach is, yes, yes, anger and grief. Of course, death is terrible. But, you get nothing out of it, right, it won’t help anything. Nothing will come of sorrowing for your son. So shut it down, shut down those emotions. That’s the stoic approach. More recently, there has been an approach developed that I’m just going to call that modern approach, the modern secular approach. It’s unprecedented in human history, as I’ll show you in a second, but what is that approach? Well, that approach is radically different because it denies that there’s anything horrible and terrible about death. The way it helps you, that this approach, the way it helps you face death is it absolutely denies that there’s anything terrible or horrible about it. Recently, I read a book by Julian Barnes, Barnes is a British novelist, an aging British novelist, and he wrote a book called, Nothing to Be Frightened Of, and the whole book is about death, and why it’s just silly to be frightened of it. And there’s Diana Athill, who’s a very famous British editor, kind of a legendary British editor. She’s now ninety seven or ninety eight. And she wrote an article in, The Guardian, which is a British newspaper, not too long ago called, it’s silly to be afraid of being dead. It’s silly to be afraid of being dead. And she lays out perfectly this approach which, by the way, you’re going to find, everywhere go into Barnes and Noble, pick up a book on dying, it’s going to be there, go to a funeral home, find a little brochure, how to talk to children about death, it’ll be there, that’s what she says. She says, first of all, she refuses to call death, the end of life. She says death is a natural process. That’s her words. Death is absolutely natural, is simply the next stage in your place in the lifecycle of the world. When you die, your body and its chemicals nourish the earth so that vegetation can come up so other other beings can eat it. And so, you become part of this life cycle.
And death itself, she says is nothing but a sliding down into non consciousness. You just go away, your consciousness goes away, you know, your chemicals, your, the organic, vitality of your body, you know, becomes part of the lifecycle of the earth, but your consciousness goes away, you just don’t know anything. So she says, “What’s there to be afraid of?” And in the end, she says, but basically, she says, coming to see death’s naturalness, took all of her fear away. And, that’s the idea. Coming to see the fact that death is natural, perfectly natural, gets rid of all fear, not to be afraid of. Well, does that work? Peter Kreeft, a Catholic author tells a story about a neighbor of his. A woman who had read all these books and she believed this was the way she was dealing with her own understanding of death. And, she was faced with an issue. She had a seven year old son. And his little cousin, a little boy, a cousin of his, died suddenly, terrible tragedy. And the boy, the seven year old comes to his mother and says, “Mommy, where’s my cousin? Now, where’s my cousin?” So, she told him the things that the brochures say, you’re supposed to say to a kid. She herself didn’t believe in a God or an afterlife or anything. So she had the integrity to say this. This is what she said, Peter Kreeft said. She says, “Now, your cousin has gone back to the earth from which we all came. We all come from the earth. He’s gone back into the earth. Death is a natural part of the cycle of life here. And when you see the earth putting forth new flowers next spring, you can know that your cousin’s life is fertilizing those flowers,” and the little boy looked at her and screamed, “I Don’t want him to be a fertilizer,” and ran out of the room.
And Peter Kreeft said, actually, she was surprised. And the reason why she was surprised was that what she had taken the propaganda to heart and it would have basically, she had repressed the natural and normal human intuition about death, but it hadn’t happened yet in her seven year old son and what is that normal intuition? The intuition is this: death is not natural. There is nothing natural about it. It’s an aberration. It’s an intrusion. It’s a monstrosity. There’s not a culture in history that ever saw it that way.
There’s not a single ancient legend or ancient myth, go back to any of the ancient myths that try to talk about the origins of things. And if death ever shows up in any of those myths, it’s always the intrusion it’s an aberration, something went wrong. Everybody knows this is not the way it’s supposed to be. Everybody knows that, unless you read the brochures.
Dylan Thomas is much closer to it. The Welsh poet who said do not go gentle into that good night. You know, he’s making fun of the whole idea. Do not go gentle into that good night. Rage, rage, against the dying of the light. That’s way closer to what all human beings have always known is true. Death isn’t natural at all. Now, when people say, death is nothing to be frightened of, why are they wrong? Why are they wrong? Maybe we scream, but why?
Why are we afraid? Why are we angry? Why are they wrong? There’s two reasons why when they say, that there’s nothing to be frightened of, they’re wrong. Well, here’s one. The one is this: The first is, take a look at your life and ask yourself what is it that gives meaning to your life? What is it that makes your life bearable? What is the greatest joy in your life? It’s love relationships. love relationships. So, when they say, well, you know, death is nothing, it’s just sliding down into non consciousness. Well, wait a minute, you know what that means. What that means is, all of your life death will strip you one by one of every person that you love in your life and then in the end, death will come upon you, and it will strip you from all your loved ones. See, death will spend all of your life stripping you off loved ones, and then at the end, it’ll strip all your loved ones off you. Death will destroy everything meaningful, everything that gives your life, any meaning. And that’s what you’re afraid of it? See. But, here’s the second reason. Or, when people say there’s nothing to be afraid of, why, we know that’s not true and why so many of us run away screaming? It’s because we’re not sure about what happens after death. See, when you say, “Well, after death, you just go down to the non-consciousness, you know, you stop existing.” How do you know that? Can you prove that? Of course, you can prove that, that’s a leap of faith. And Epicurus, the great, old Greek philosopher put it like this. He says, “What men fear is not that death is annihilation, but that it is not.”

We’re not so, we’re not afraid that that is the end, we’re afraid that it’s not. It might not be. Rousseau a little more recently put it like this, and he’s no Orthodox Christian, but Rousseau said, “He who pretends to look on death without fear, lies.” I don’t know how it were in French, but it’s pretty good in English. “He who pretends to look on death without fear, lies,” but probably, you know, the most eloquent person who explained this problem, why it’s silly to think that death is nothing to be frightened of is what Shakespeare put in the mouth of Hamlet. You know what Hamlet said? “… the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country, from who’s bourn, no traveler returns, puzzles the will, and makes us rather keep the ills that we have, rather than fly the ills we do not have. Therefore conscience makes cowards of us all. Do you hear what he’s saying? He says, we dread something after death, death. The undiscovered country from who’s bourn, no traveler returns. In other words, we will, nobody is going to come back from that, we don’t know what’s out there. And it puzzles the will, why? I know this was, I’ve as a pastor, I can tell you how often I’ve talked to people who are really seriously ill over the years. And even the people that have no intellectual belief in God or afterlife at all, when you’re seriously ill and when you know death is even a possibility, you start to feel a sense that I need to evaluate my life. Have I lived the way I should? And nobody feels they’ve lived the way they should. Because, as we get near to death, we sense what if there is, what if that isn’t the end? That’s what Epicurus said.
Thus conscience makes cowards of us in the face of death. We’re not afraid that death is the end, we’re afraid that death isn’t and we know we haven’t lived as we ought. So you see, would you be anxious if you were driving in a car at about 60 miles an hour and, you couldn’t see any of the windows, would that make you anxious? Okay. Well, we’re all driving toward death and the windows, we can’t see out the windows, we have no idea where we’re going. No wonder we run screaming from the room. So death is nothing to be frightened of. Death just doesn’t work. But here’s the point. And here’s the first point.
We should grieve them. We should be angry, we should weep. Notice, if you look at carefully at this first verse of this first sentence, if you look at the Greek grammar carefully, you’ll see that Paul is not saying he doesn’t want them to grieve. He doesn’t say, “I want to give you hope, so you don’t grieve,” no, look, he says, “I don’t want you to grieve like those without hope. In other words, Paul is saying you should grieve, absolutely you should grieve, why because, death is a monstrosity, it’s an aberration. It’s not right. We know that. And therefore we should be like Jesus.
Remember how Homer said, or in the Illiad, the character said? “Don’t give into angry, weeping.” Look at Jesus Christ at the tomb of Lazarus in John 11. What’s he doing? He’s weeping. Right? Mary comes up to Him and says, “Lord, if you hadn’t, if you’d been here, our brother wouldn’t have died.” It just says, “Jesus wept.” Nowadays, he’s angry, he’s angry. It says He was furious. And why would He be furious? It’s interesting that Jesus Christ claimed to be God, and yet when He sees death, He’s furious. What does that mean? That’s the answer to why all human beings intuitively know that this death isn’t natural because when Jesus Christ claiming that a God gets angry at death, that shows that this was not part of His original design. This is not the way He made the world.
We were made to last; we weren’t made to go, get weaker and weaker and shrivel up and go away. We were meant to get stronger and stronger and wiser and wiser, more, more beautiful forever. We know that’s what we were made for. We weren’t built to lose the people we love, we are built to keep them.
And Jesus, by being angry, and weeping at the tomb of Lazarus shows that this is not the way things ought to be. So, Jesus is not doing what a stoic does. Does He? Jesus is not saying, “Shut it down.” He’s weeping. He’s angry. Why? Because you should grieve. It’d be wrong not to grieve. But, on the other hand, it’s not like the modern person who says, “Well, you know, this is the way of things, you know,” he’s just going to be helping the fertilizer. You don’t see Jesus doing that either. No, but what here’s the point? He says, grieve. The Bible says, grieve, do grieve but, you say, “How am I going to not be overwhelmed by that?” And the answer is, you have to mix hope in with your grief. Paul does not say, “Don’t grieve.” He says, “I don’t want you to grieve without hope.” You know, how in the old days you used to put salt, rub salt into the meat so the meat didn’t go bad? You need to rub hope into your grief so your grief doesn’t go bad. To not grieve, to tell yourself it’s natural, or to shut down your emotions is not right. It’s not good for you and it’s not right. But either hand [inaudible] just simply giving in to the emotion and not have any hope, that will destroy you too. What you need is you need to be able to rub hope into your grief. So, instead of making you more anxious and more upset, and more hard and more cynical, makes you wiser and better and more compassionate and deeper. So what is that hope? How do we get that hope? Point 2, and it tells you right here in verse 14, “See brothers and sisters, we don’t want you to be grieving without hope.” But then he says, right away, verse 14, “For we believe that Jesus died and rose again.” And so we believe that God will bring with Jesus, those who have fallen asleep in Him.
How can you have hope? Jesus died and rose again. There’s the hope. See, think about it now for a second. One of the things that’s most fascinating about Jesus is He weeps at the tomb of Lazarus. This is John 11. And He grieves and He’s angry. But He also doesn’t go home. He doesn’t turn away. He goes charging toward the tomb. In fact, you know, many a commentators talk about how strange it is that in fact, very often translators play it down because it seems so strange. And very often our English translations don’t lay, don’t get across the fact that basically Jesus went roaring to the tomb in anger.
Why? Well, He says to Mary and Martha, “I’m the resurrection.” See, there’s a perfect example of why, how Christians ought to be. You shouldn’t be a stoic, just tamping down your emotions. But you also shouldn’t be a modern, secular person, not getting angry at death, thinking it’s perfectly natural.
You should weep, you should be angry, but you should go with hope toward the death, not like how you in any way. And of course, He was able to do that because He said, “I am the resurrection and the life.” Ah, You say, “Well, wait a minute, but I’m not Jesus. I’m not the resurrection and the life.” So how do I not get overwhelmed with grief and anger? How do I face death with that kind of confidence and hope? And here’s how. He didn’t just die and rise. He died and rose for us, He died and rose so that those that believe will come with Him. The other passage that I thought about preaching on, by the way, months ago when I thought about this day and preaching on how the gospel gives us hope in the face of death, I thought about another passage. It was Heb 2, and in the end, I chose 1 Thess 4 but I got to tell you about Heb 2 because it’s important as well. And Heb 2, which is remarkable, it talks about our salvation. And it says in verse 10, “in bringing many sons to glory,” that means, in God seeking to bring us into salvation,” in bringing many sons to glory.” It was fitting that God should make the champion of our salvation perfect through suffering, so that he would share our humanity. in bringing many sons to glory, was fitting that God should make the champion of our salvation perfect. You’re suffering. Now, the word “champion” is the Greek word αρχηγός (archegos). And the Greek word αρχηγός (archegos) and the word means what’s a champion. The word means representational, representational fighting. A champion is a person who does representational combat. He fights for someone else; he fights in the place of someone else. And then it goes on in verse 14, and says what Jesus is going to do. It says, He shared in our humanity, so that by His death, He should destroy death, and free those who all their lives have been slaves to the fear of death. Jesus shared in our humanity, so by His death, He should destroy death, and free those who all of your lives were held in slavery to the fear of death. Now, how does this work? How do you get this hope? Listen here. Jesus is a champion, then let’s imagine being in a battle. Let’s imagine you in the battle. And the champion is scanning the field. Why? Because the champions, not just, the champions fights for other people. So he looks over you and guess what? You’re not doing very well. You’re overmatched, let’s say, against someone who has, some other warrior who is better armed, far bigger, far stronger, and far faster than you, and you’re going to die. So, you’re running away from him.
But don’t forget what I said. He’s not only far stronger and better, but he’s also far faster, so you’re going to die. So, what does the champion do? Like Jesus Christ, the champion, goes toward the danger. And He runs and He puts Himself between you and your impending death. And He turns and He faces your foe. And you’re able to get away and He faces your foe, He faces your death, and He dies so that you may live, that’s a champion. But here’s what the Bible says, not only has Jesus Christ on that, Jesus Christ, the champion of our faith, not only has He gone into death, and He’s faced our death for us. The Bible doesn’t say death is just an enemy. Listen, Please, everybody. The Bible doesn’t just say death is an enemy, It also says death is an executioner. That is to say, death is is our penalty. Not just our enemies, are penalty. And just as when you pay the penalty, you have a creditor and you pay the penalty, the creditor no longer has any power over you that when Jesus Christ took our death in our place, when He took the death we deserve, the wages of sin is death. What happened? It doesn’t say He just died. What does it say? He rose, meaning, He went into death and because He paid the penalty of death, death no longer has any power for all those who believe in Him. Put it another way, He went into death and He blew a hole at the back of it. He went into death and He blue a hole at the back of it. And this is the reason why you don’t have to be afraid of death anymore, why Jesus Christ has delivered you from slavery to the freedom of death. Hamlet was wrong.

Someone has come back from death. Hamlet was wrong. Someone has come back. He says death, an undiscovered country from who’s bourn no traveler returns, Jesus Christ is come back. Here’s what He said, “I took your death for you and I blew a hole through the back of it. And if you believe in me, then when death comes upon you, here’s what you can say, ‘Jesus lives and death is now but my entrance into glory; courage, then my soul for thou has the crown of life before thee.’ ” Jesus lives. And so, death is now but my entrance into glory. It looks like a dark, looks like a dark door, but it goes right through the back. Jesus has opened the door. CS Lewis puts it like this: “Our great Captain Jesus Christ, has opened a cleft in the pitiless walls of the world, and He bids us come through it.”
There’s hope. There’s hope, when death comes to you, you can be all the courage in the world because your great champion has already faced this. He’s already paid the penalty. And now, all death can do is lead you into glory, into His arms. That’s the reason why, by the way, George Herbert says, “Death used to be an executioner. But the gospel makes him just a gardener.”
If you meet Jesus, if you meet death in Christ, he won’t execute you, he’ll just plant you and make something far greater, just like the flower is greater than the seed, just like the tree in the forest is greater than the acorn. CS Lewis puts it like this: “If we let him, He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into dazzling radiant, immortal creatures, pulsing all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine. Bright stainless mirrors which reflect back to God perfectly though of course on a smaller scale, his own boundless power and delight and goodness. That is what we are in for, nothing less. There’s a hope for you, rub that in. Rub that into every experience of grief. And see how it makes you and prepares you to be the great, dazzling, radiant, wise, loving being you’re going to be, if you die in Jesus Christ. So listen, lastly, how do you actually take hold of it? See, verse 18 says something pretty interesting. It says, “Therefore, encourage one another with these words.” Now, the word “encourage” is, it’s a translation of the Greek word parakaleo. Very important word, hard word to translate. It’s a powerful word. Sometimes it’s translated “comfort.” parakaleo means basically, I like to “encourage.” parakaleo is, this is what it’s saying. Take these truths, the truths that I just gave you, the truth that I hope gave you some goosebumps. It’s not enough just to believe it. You’ve got to work them in your lives. In fact, it’s supposed to do with each other, encourage one another, not encourage yourself. Take these thruths and learn how to instill them, distill them, drill them down into your heart until they make you people that can face anything. How do you do that? Well, I think by looking at this passage and looking at the unique features of the Christian hope, and drilling and taking hold of those, (in just a few minutes I got left here, let me do that for you), because you see, the first verse. Many people think Paul’s being kind of harsh when he says, I don’t want you to grieve like the rest of mankind who have no hope. And a lot of people say, “Well look, maybe secular people don’t have any hope of an afterlife, but lots of other religions do. So, why would Paul say nobody else but Christians have any hope in the face of death?” I think he’s speaking comparatively. You know, the place where Jesus says, “If you want to be my disciple, you have to hate your father and mother.” It doesn’t really mean that you’re supposed to literally hate your father and mother. He’s saying, “Love for Me ought to be so much greater than all other loves.” Look like something else by comparison. And I think Paul’s talking the same way. He’s not saying that nobody else has any hope. But what he is saying is, the Christian promise, the Christian promise of the future is unique. There are certain aspects that no other religion even begins to promise you. And there’s a sense in which, and you can judge for yourself because I’m going to give you these three, because of how different this Christian hope is and the sense in which it outstrips all the others. Now, will you be the judge? Here are the three things you need to think about.
Only Christianity promises all three of these, okay? The first is that heaven is a world of love, that heaven is a world of love. Now, I would say a big number of religions in this world do not say that when you die, they say you survive death, your soul lives on after death, but not as a personal consciousness. So, most Eastern religions would say that when you die, you become an impersonal part of the impersonal all soul. It’s some, you know, some Buddhist teachings, thinkers have said, “It’s like a drop of water going back into the ocean. The substance of the water doesn’t go away. But frankly, it loses its droppness.” And so many religions say, yes, you live on, but you live on not as a personal consciousness, you don’t, you know, you’re not conscious anymore. You become part of the great all soul. Now, there’s a lot of ways of talking about that, you know, you’ll become stardust and all that; it sounds very comforting, but here’s the key. If the meaning of life is love, and you lose your ability to have personal consciousness after death, then there’s no love after death because, only persons can love.
So, one of the reasons why John Updike, by the way, in his memoir, talks about why he held on to Christian belief and didn’t go into some kind of new age or other kinds of Eastern beliefs, you know why? He says, “I want to be a self forever.” He says, “I want to be a self forever, because only if you’re a self, living with other selves, can you have love.” Jonathan Edwards wrote a sermon, which you can find online, but it’s, I tell you, it’s something you’ve to probably read about twenty times to get all the wonders out of it. He wrote a sermon called, Heaven is a World of Love. It’s the most radical and astonishing sermon he ever wrote. Jonathan Edwards, of course, is the eighteenth century American philosopher and pastor, and here’s what he says in the sermon, a gist of it. He says, in the center of heaven, is not just some generic God, not just a generic god, it’s the Triune God of Christianity, one God in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And those three persons have been loving each other, pouring love and joy into each other in infinite degrees through all eternity. And in heaven, he says, the fountain of that love, a dynamic, magnificent, impossible to imagine, powerful fountain of love is finally released without hindrance and it floods all around you. All the people who are in heaven are completely flooded with this perfect love. And, and Edward says, all the things that on earth keep love from being anything like the joy it ought to be. Just think about joyful love as here. But he says, on earth things are always clogging our love. He says, “Your love is clogged.” Your love is like a pipe clogged, very little love actually gets through. But, he says, in heaven all the clogs are gone. So for example, he actually uses the word clog. But so for example, on the one hand, he says, in heaven everybody will always love everybody else equally. Isn’t it true by the way? Then on Earth, you never love the other person exactly the way they love you. They either love you more than you do or less than you do. It’s that always is a problem. In heaven everybody will love everyone equally; you’ll love God equally with all your heart, He’ll love you equally with all His being. You’ll love everyone else equally. Here’s another thing on earth, you want to express your love. You want to tell people how much you love them but you never can get it out; you can ever express it, can you? But in heaven everyone else will be, everybody will be able to perfectly articulate all others, your love. So, you’ll perfectly express it, you’ll perfectly experience it, your perfectly give it, your perfectly receive it. On Earth, we tend to love people so that they’ll make us happy. But in heaven we’ll always love people perfectly, which means we’ll put our happiness into their happiness. Do you follow that? Edward says, to perfectly love people is not to say, “I love you so you can make me happy,” to perfectly love people is to say, “I put my happiness into your happiness. So, I’m only happy If you’re happy and the happier you are, the happier I am.” You realize what that does? It means the more prosperous and joyful and great and brilliant and glorious that people are who you love that the more joyful you will be, and they’ll love you more perfectly and they will make you more glorious and on it goes exponentially forever.
Also in heaven, you’ll never lose love. See the envy, the loss, the inability to praise and express our love all the things that here on Earth, make love always clogged, they’ll be gone. Heaven is a world of love. At the center of a Triune God which is the ocean and fountain of love flooding you every minute making your love pure, pure. There’s no other faith that promises anything like that, that talks like that. Secondly, by the way, you see what it says down here in verse 17? “After that, we who are still alive will be caught together with them to meet the Lord, … we will be with the Lord.” Persons, persons, persons, we’ll be together. Secondly, the Christian hope talks about resurrection. It says, “The dead in Christ will rise first,” verse 16. But then it says, by the way, “… and we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with him in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will be with the Lord forever.” Commentators always point out that the word “meet” is a technical term. It was a word that meant that when someone, a conquering king had left town, and had gone out to do a great victory and was coming back victorious, you went outside of the city as the king was coming toward the city, and you met them. The word met means, you join the parade, and he came on in and this is not talking about going to heaven and leaving the earth. This is talking about being part of Jesus Christ coming back to renew the earth and make this material world perfect, not just redeeming your souls, but redeeming your bodies, not just redeeming yourself, your individual selves, but redeeming the world. It says, there’s no suffering, there’s no disease, there’s.… If the best our salvation could do was give you a future, immaterial, spiritual, constant, you know, a kind of bliss that consoled you for all the stuff that all the stuff you never got here, that’d be one thing, but it wouldn’t be a total victory over death. But Christianity, only Christianity teaches that Jesus Christ is coming back and He’s going to renew this world and therefore you’re going to get the body you never had, not just the body back you used to have, you’re going to be able to fly, you’re going to be able to dance, you’re going to be musicians, you’re going to be able to make the music you’ve never been able to make. You’re going to get that, you’re not going to float in the kingdom of God. Going to march in the kingdom of God, you’re going to dance in the kingdom of God, you’re going to hug in the kingdom of God. Vinoth Ramachandra, he’s a Sri Lankan Christian. People always come to him and they say, “Don’t you believe your salvation in other faiths, other religions? Don’t you think your salvation of the other religions?” He says, “What kind of salvation you’re talking about? Not this kind of religion. There’s no other, this kind of salvation, hope for this world, souls, bodies, world.” He says, “There’s no other faith, no other religion even claims this kind of salvation.” You say, “Don’t you think your salvation in another faith? Not this salvation.
No other religion promises this kind of hope. Lastly, and very Lastly, who rises to be part of this new world? The good people? No, the people in Christ. Did you see that? Those who sleep in Christ, those who are dead in Christ, and when Paul uses the word “in Christ,” he’s talking about people who’ve just believed. The minute you believe God puts your sins on Jesus, and God puts His righteousness on you and you’re in Christ, and therefore you don’t have to come up to death saying, “I wonder if I’ve lived a good enough life.” If you’re a Christian, you come up to death saying, “Jesus lives; He died and rose, so I will die and rise with Him.” Jesus lives, and death is now but my entrance into glory. You know, at the very, very end of this, I’ll just tell you, George Herbert’s dialogue anthem, go get it, it’s online. George Herbert wrote something called dialogue anthem. It’s a dialogue between Christian and death, a Christian and death and the Christian is taunting death. It’s a very biblical poem. It reminds me of 1 Cor 15 where Paul is taunting death, saying, “Oh, death! Where is thy sting? Oh, grave! Where is thy victory,” making fun of death, saying huh, you can’t hurt me. And this is exactly what the Christian looks, in the dialogue anthem by George Herbert, the Christian looks at death, and says, “Alas, poor Death! where is thy famous force, thy ancient sting?” And death looks at him and says, “Alas, poor mortal, go and read how I killed your king.” Christian looks back and he says, “Poor Death! and who was hurt thereby? Thy curse laid on him made thee accurst.” Death turns around and says, “Let losers talk, yet thou shalt die; Mine arms shall crush thee,” and Christian looks at him and says, “Spare not, do thy worst. Thou can only make me better than before; And thou shall be so much worse, thou shalt be no more.” Live with that kind of greatness, live with that kind of buoyancy, live with that kind of joy. And you can look anything in the faith.
Let’s pray: Our Father, we ask that you’d help us to be people who fear no darkness, fear, no darkness. And we ask that you’d help us do that by taking hold of the great things that you have given us in Jesus Christ. Yes, He saved us from the penalty of sin. Yes, He, we’ve talked about these over the weeks. But He also on the battlefield, defeated death, destroyed death and liberates us from any fear of death so that we don’t grieve except with hope and that hope makes us greater through the grief, turns us into the kind of people that someday you will make us immortal, radiant, loving, wise, kind. Father, get us, console us with the thoughts of having a world of love, console us with the thoughts of getting our new body, the bodies not only that we used to have, the bodies that we never had. Console us with the knowledge that this is absolutely assured and it’s certain and we don’t have to worry, and enable us Lord, then to be able to turn to other people around us and share this hope, because all humankind needs it. So, do all these things we ask through Jesus. In His name we pray, Amen.




The Sin-Bearer

A reading from the book of Isaiah 52:13–53:12:

  See, my servant will act wisely; he will be raised and lifted up and highly exalted. Just as there were many who were appalled at him—his appearance was so disfigured beyond that of any human being and his form marred beyond human likeness—so he will sprinkle many nations, and kings will shut their mouths because of him. For what they were not told, they will see, and for what they have not heard, they will understand. Who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? He grew up before him like a tender shoot, and like a root out of dry ground. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected by mankind, a man of suffering, and familiar with pain. Like one from whom people hide their faces he was despised, and we held him in low esteem. Surely he took up our pain and bore our suffering, yet we considered him punished by God, stricken by him and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was on him, and by his wounds we are healed. We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to our own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he did not open his mouth; he was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before it shearers is silent, so he did not open his mouth. By oppression and judgment he was taken away. Yet who of his generation protested?For he was cut off from the land of the living; for the transgression of my people he was punished. He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it was the Lord’s will to crush him and cause him to suffer, and though the Lord makes his life an offering for sin, he will see his offspring and prolong his days, and the will of the Lord will prosper in his hand. After he has suffered, he will see the light of life and be satisfied; by His knowledge my righteous servant will justify many, and he will bear their iniquities. Therefore, I will give him a portion among the great, and he will divide the spoils with the strong, because he poured out His life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors. For he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. The word of the Lord.


So as Jeff just mentioned, in the coming weeks, we’re going to be looking at Redeemers’s mission in the city over the next few years. We’re finishing a sermon series today that as we’ve been looking at the gospel, the goods of the gospel, the benefits the gospel brings to us. And, tonight we’re looking at the final passage we’re going to look at. It explains how we get all this great gospel goods, how the salvation is accomplished. And, the only way to look at Isa 53, a passage so important, so crucial to the Bible, the whole Bible, so deep and profound, but the only way for me to lay this out in front of you is, is to use simplicity. In some ways, it’s infinite. It’s deeper than the universe, but in other ways, it’s a fairly simple passage. And so, I’m just going to layout simply what it teaches. And then, at least briefly give you a panoramic view of how this radically shapes every area of your life. But, if you’re reading through the book of Isaiah, and you get to this passage, you’re shocked because up until now, Isaiah has been indicating that God was going to send a King to put things right in the world, a great King, a majestic King, a powerful King was going to put everything right. And now, starting in chapter 42, Isaiah started talking about a Servant, God’s Servant. And when you read that, you say, Okay, well, maybe that’s the King. But then you get here.
He has no majesty? He has no Majesty, well, who is this? Could this be the King? So when you read through this, if you’re reading through the book of Isaiah, and you get here, you’re confused. It’s surprising and it’s shocking. It actually is a surprising, shocking passage. It actually subverts every human category of thought about salvation. So, let’s just take a look at the three ways in which it is so surprising. And we’ll just simply draw the implications and see what this teaches us about the salvation that Jesus Christ brings us. You know, Jesus Himself in Luke 22:37, on the night before he died, pointed to this passage and said, this is about me. He said, He was numbered with the transgressors, quoting verse 12, of Isa 53, and applying it to Him. So, Jesus Himself said, “If you want to understand what I’ve come to do, and what I’m going to be doing tomorrow,” remember, He’s talking about the day before He died, “if you understand what I’m going to do what I’m doing tomorrow,” read Isa 53. Let’s notice three things that are remarkable, surprising about the passage. I want to show you the ordinariness, the violence, and the vicariousness; the ordinariness, the violence and the vicariousness. First of all, let’s look at the ordinariness. You see it in verses 1, 2, and 3. It’s talking about this servant who’s going to come? You know, in Isa 42, it says God’s servant is going to come and bring justice to the nations. See why. But you get to Isa 53, and you’re expecting someone a power and greatness, He’s going to bring justice to the nations. And here it says, verse 2. “He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him.” Look at the second half of verse 3, “He was despised, and we held him in low esteem.” Now, what this is saying is that this Servant, who of course is Jesus Christ, had none of the markers or the indicators that the world looks for, in trying to assess whether this is a person of dynamism and of power and of success. The world looks for certain things. You’ve applied for jobs in New York City? They’re looking for these things. Okay. But Jesus had none of them. What I mean? Well, it says, He had no beauty. However, see, if they did have shops back there, His headshot [inaudible] would have been terrible. This just says, He was not attractive. He was not good looking. He didn’t have looks, but He didn’t have majesty? See, He didn’t have looks. He didn’t have money. He didn’t have connections. He didn’t have credentials. He didn’t have any of this stuff that if you come to New York and try to make it, they’re going to be looking for in you, He didn’t have any of it.
There’s a place, I once read a commentary on it. You know, a couple of places where Jesus went back to His hometown Nazareth and tried to preach, and everybody said, “Aren’t you just Mary’s son, the carpenter’s son and they wouldn’t listen to him, and the commentator said, they could not penetrate the veil of ordinariness around Jesus Christ. “Ordinariness.” Now, here’s what I’d like you to consider. First point: Even though He was ordinary, verse 1, “Who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” What’s the arm of the Lord? That’s a metaphor for the power of God. And this is saying, that this Man, this Servant, despised, taken lightly, held in low esteem, no beauty, no majesty, this is how God’s power works in the world. In fact, it actually says, “Who has believed our message, or to whom is the arm of the Lord been revealed?” What it’s saying is, the world just doesn’t get this because, the way the power of God operate not only in Jesus, but in general, the way the armor of the Lord operates is not the way the world thinks power operates. So, you have to be really careful. If you are going to become a Christian or if you are a Christian, you have to recognize that the power of God does not operate the way that most people in the world thinks the power operates. In other words, it operates in extraordinary or ordinary ways. Let me give you an example, several. Do you know the ordinariness of how the grace of God and the life of God grows in your life? You know how it does? Through daily Bible reading, your daily prayer, through self-examination, through worship, through taking the bread and the cup, week after week after week, by hanging out with people that make you better, not worse, these are ordinary things. And you’d have to do over and over and over. G. Campbell Morgan, the great English preacher, who preached in London for many years in twentieth century tells a story about how he went to, I think was Italy. And he was in a graveyard and he was looking at all these wonderful monuments and these great big graves that usually have a huge marble slabs over the grave where the body was buried, and he saw a remarkable sight. He saw that a tree, I guess was an oak tree, had grown up out of one of the graves. And it’d become large to the place where it not only had rolled the slab away but it had broken it in half. And of course, you know what this means, it was an acorn of some kind, it was down, probably in the soil beneath the body, got in there when they were digging the grave who knows, but that acorn had grown up into this huge tree that it actually, you know, snapped in half this huge marble slab.
So, Campbell Morgan, the preacher says, “Now, imagine trying with that little acorn to actually in the beginning, you know, imagine when the grave was first laid out and the slide was like, imagine taking an acorn and trying to break the slab with the acorn, wouldn’t have worked. The acorn would have been smashed, not the grave. But Morgan says, “But give it time, slow, slow, slow, ordinary growth, nothing spectacular, ordinary growth, there’s power in that acorn. Because you by the way you do know that inside the acorn is only power to grow one oak tree, but then to grow all the other kinds of trees that come out of the acorns in that one tree. Otherwise, you could cover the entire world with wood with a life that’s in one acorn, and that the Bible says, “The kingdom of God is like a mustard seed,” the smallest of seeds, grows in the largest of trees, but how does it grow? How does it grow? Slowly, through the ordinary means of grace, Bible reading, prayer, community, fellowship, Lord’s Supper, regular, you know, weekly worship, daily Bible reading, self-examination.
That’s how it happens. Do not has the arm of the Lord been revealed to you? Are you missing it? The arm of the Lord is in those practices, those practices, that’s where it is, because, that’s what’s going to take that little acorn of infinite power that is planted in you if you’re a Christian, because if you’re a Christian, the Bible says we become, for a 2 Peter has an amazing spirit place, which is, when the Holy Spirit comes into you, you become partakers of the divine nature. Do you understand the ordinariness of how that grows? Don’t miss it. There’s a place in Screwtape Letters, you know, the guy who wrote Mere Christianity, C. S. Lewis wrote a book called Screwtape Letters. And it’s always a little bit difficult to quote anything from The Screwtape Letters, because Screw Tape letters is a satire, they are supposedly letters of a senior devil, written to a junior devil on how to tempt human beings. And so whenever you read something, you always have to get people into the moment because you have to understand the enemy in this quote is Jesus, okay, and here the patient is a person who’s just become a Christian. And he’s under the care of a particular devil, and the senior devil is trying to say, “Hey, he became a Christian. He’s starting to go to church, but all is not lost yet.” And so, this is what the letter says. It says, “Work hard on the disappointment, which is certainly coming to him, during his first weeks of church. The enemy has Jesus remember.” Allows this disappointment to occur on the threshold of every human endeavor. It occurs when the boy who has been enchanted with stories from the Odyssey, buckles down to learning Greek. It happens when people who have been in love with each other have actually gotten married and begin the real task of wanting to live together. The enemy, Jesus, takes this risk. What’s that risk? The risk is that all good things happen slowly, you see. The enemy takes this risk, because he has a curious fantasy of making all these disgusting human vermin into what he calls his free lovers and servants, desiring their freedom, he refuses to carry them by their mere affections and habits to any of the goals, which he sets before him in their lives or opportunity. Can you hear that? Hmm? Okay, that’s Intel. Don’t miss the ordinariness of God’s power working in your life or the devil might make something of it in your life. So, don’t miss the ordinariness. Secondly, let’s look at the violence. So, the Messiah, the Suffering Servant, Jesus is ordinary, and that has implications for how you live your life. But secondly, Jesus suffers violence.
And that has implications of how you live your life. Did you see the words, especially, verse 4 and 5, okay, stricken, pierced, crushed. Then down to verse 8, cut off, and the Hebrew experts tell you that the Hebrew word translated “cutoff” means the most violent possible death. They tell you that the Hebrew word that says in verse 5 is pierced. That Hebrew word conveys the most painful possible death. So, the point is, it even says Jesus Christ suffered enormously and terribly. Now, in a minute, I’m going to talk about why He did. But just for three or four minutes, let’s pause and realize that He did that Jesus Christ who was the servant of God, who came into the world to save the world who came to the world to put things right. Jesus Christ who was loved by God suffered, suffered terribly. Many, many people have said, “I thought God loved me, but then He let me suffer like this. So, how could He love me?” I think, most people believe, “Yes, I know that God might let some things happen. He could work through some difficulties, but not this terrible thing that I’m going through. If God really loves me, He would never let me suffer terribly.”
And the only response to that is, have you seen Jesus? Jesus Christ, God loved. He says at His baptism, “A voice came down from heaven,” as Jesus was coming up, He says, this is My beloved Son, in whom I’m well pleased,” but then immediately, He was lead out into the wilderness to be assaulted and attacked by the devil because it was part of what He came to do. Put it like this: God’s wise, redemptive love in your life is compatible with very rough experience. God can be with you, God can love you. God can be working in your life and God could be working through you and you still suffer terribly. Why? Because, that’s how I work with Jesus. Jesus became highly exalted, and saved us through suffering. I can just tell you, I’m an infinitely better person than I would ever have been if it wasn’t for my suffering. Anyone who has ever given Christianity half a chance, and is stuck with Christianity for any period of time, will know that what Paul says is right, “… that when I’m weak, then I’m strong. (My power) God’s power is made perfect in weakness.
Joseph, remember the story? I mean, Joseph is sold into slavery, and then he starts to work his way up, you know, as one of the top slaves, but then he’s betrayed and thrown into prison. And then he starts to work his way up and then he meets somebody who knows the king and can get him out of there. And the guy goes out and then forgets all about him, I mean, for about twenty years. Everything goes wrong for Joseph, everything. Every prayer is unanswered, everyone. But at the end of his life, he can look back and you see this in Gen 50:20, at the end of his life, he can look back far enough to know that every single bad thing that happened to him had to happen to him, or his family would have starved or would have spiritually been lost in bitterness and blindness. But even he couldn’t see what you and I can see because we can see from our perspective where we are, at our period in history, we can see what we can see that God through all that suffering was actually nurturing and shaping a family out of which would come the salvation of the world.
And what that means is there is no way you will ever have the perspective necessary to see why God is letting you go through the things He’s letting you go through right now. You might get some perspective as time goes on, but you will never get sufficient perspective, you’ll never ever ever ever see. In this life you’ll never see why God is allowing you to go through what you’re going through. You’ll never see it. But here’s what you do see. You see Jesus? Do you see Jesus? Are you suffering? Then see Jesus. Okay. So thirdly, see the ordinariness, see the violence. And then thirdly, see the vicariousness, the vicariousness, I know the word doesn’t show up in there, but I’m wrestling in a way because I’m looking for a word and that’s the best one I could come up with, to describe what is probably the main theme of this whole passage, at least ten times.
An idea shows up that I’m calling vicariousness ten times at least, what do I mean? Well, first of all, one of the things that keeps coming up here is that the servant, who is Jesus, keeps taking on things that are not His. He took our pain, verse 4, he bore our suffering, verse 4. The punishment that brought us peace, this is in verse 5, was on Him. So, over and over again it says He’s taking on things that do not belong to him. That’s vicarious. He’s taking on things that don’t belong to Him. Well, wait a minute. What does that mean? I don’t know what does that mean? What it means taking on those things? Ah, then if you look over at verse 12, which is the verse that Jesus quotes on the night before He dies, which make it extremely important verse on the night before He dies, here’s what He says. “He was numbered with the transgressors.” You know, if you’re about to die, and you know, you’re about to die, you think of the most important things you’ve ever read, you know, the most important, the best music you’ve ever heard. I mean, you think you grab hold of the most important things you’ve ever known or ever read.
And on that night just before He died, He remembered Isa 53:12, “he was numbered with the transgressors,” and see there’s the key. What does it mean that He took our punishment? What does it mean that He took our sorrows? To say He was numbered with the transgressors, doesn’t mean He became a transgressor. No, no, no, to be numbered with the transgressors mean to be counted as a transgressor. Not that He was a sinner now, but He was treated as one. And, that’s the first part of what happened in this transaction. When God says, “I’ve sent my Servant, and it says, he was punished, he was pierced for our transgressions, he was punished for our iniquities, the punishment that brought us peace.… So, on the one hand, He takes on what we have, which means, He’s treated as if He’d done all the things we’ve done. But then it says, “My servant will justify many.” In verse 11, it says the most amazing thing. And verse 10 and 11, he says, it was the Lord’s will to crush him and cause him to suffer. And though the Lord makes His life an offering for sin, He will see His offspring. In other words, He’ll see the results. He will see the results of His suffering and He will be satisfied. For by His knowledge, my righteous Servant will justify many. What does it mean to justify something?
What does it mean to justify somebody? It says it means to make them righteous, and see over here when it says, “The punishment that brought us peace was on him.” He deserved the peace, we deserved the punishment. But guess what? He gets the punishment and we get the peace. And what this must mean is, and here’s the heart of the gospel, it’s what, vicariousness is one way to put it. But another way to put it is substitution. Jesus Christ is treated by God as if He’d done everything we have done. So, if you’d believe in Him, you’re treated as if you have done everything He has done. And that’s the gospel that is radical that is different than any other religion. Don’t you see that every other religion is from the strong to the strong. Every other religion, the founder of the religion, dies in strength, dies surrounded by adoring disciples. Every other founder of every major world religion dies successfully with not only adoring disciples around, but being well known and having established this great movement. Jesus Christ died absolutely rejected in utter weakness. He was despised. But, He not only comes in weakness because he’s weak, but then His salvation is only for the weak. It’s only for those who say, I will never, see, the other religion says, the strong person, the strong founder is saying, “If you want to be connected to God, live like this, summit [inaudible] of your strength and do this and be this,” yes, that’s the every other religion. Christianity is different. Christianity says, “Our founder dies in weakness.” But He accomplished the salvation that we could never accomplish ourselves. We’re not strong enough to do it. In fact, if we think we’re strong enough to do it, we lose it.
And that means we’re only, salvation is from the weak to the weak. Salvation is from a weak dying Jesus Christ, who says, salvation has to be a gift, a complete gift. I’m treated the way you deserved to be treated, says Jesus. But if you believe in me, the Father will treat you as I deserved to be treated, as righteous. And therefore salvation is a complete gift. And this is the reason, by the way, why Jesus is both King and Servant. You know why? Because God is both righteous and loving. He’s both just and absolutely holy and loving. Oh, my goodness! if it wasn’t for the cross, it’s one or the other. Do I throw the law at them, or do I love them? Do I make them pay what the law says, they must pay, or do I love them. But the cross to see the law, by love, fulfilled on the cross.
They come together; He’s King and Servant. See, so that God can be both just and justified to those who believe in Him, just punishing sin but justifier in loving you. Now, what does vicariousness mean? I put it like this: This now is a way for you to live the rest of your life. Just as the ordinariness had an implication, don’t miss the ordinary way that God’s power works, and the suffering and violence had an implication. Recognize that suffering can be one of the main ways in which God works in your life. And don’t reject it as if somehow it’s not His love or He doesn’t love you or He wouldn’t suffer. But now, thirdly, vicariousness. God substitutes Himself for us on the cross. That’s what John Stott says. The cross is the soft substitution of God. God puts Himself where you deserve to be so that now you can stand where He deserves to be honored and loved. He goes to where you deserved to be punished, suffering, so you can stand where He deserves to be honored and loved. Now, live the rest of your life like that. Are you a Christian? Were you saved that way? Now, I want you to see that every, the rest of your life should be substitutionary sacrifice. Let me give you two completely different examples, but they both work. The one is, let’s say you’re a parent. Okay? Let’s say you’re a parent, and a child comes into your life or children come into your life and immediately realize, wow, this is really going to hamper your freedom. All sorts of things that you won’t be free to do it now, you know, you used to be able to do. So, you have a choice. You can say, Look, I’m not going to let this these children get in the way of doing things I want to do. I want to travel, I want to go places, I want to do things, so I’m going to hold on to my freedom, but you realize if you do that, if you are that selfish, frankly, your child will grow up, filled with insecurities, and you know, unsure of anybody’s love, and so your child in a sense, will grow up enslaved. If you hold on to your freedom, your child will grow up enslaved. On the other hand, if you give up your freedom, the way a parent should, if you really allow, if you give so much time to your children that ordinarily you would have spent on yourself, if you give up that freedom—hold on your freedom, your child’s a slave, give up that freedom and your child will grow up, emotionally self sufficient and free, and you’ll find a new kind of freedom. You’ll find a new kind of freedom. New freedom that comes from a relationship with a child, a freedom comes from the richness of family life, do you see that? Hold on to your freedom, they become a slave. See, it’s them or you but if you love them, if you, all love is a substitutionary sacrifice. All love, all real love, means, I sacrifice for you. And I find in the end, that though I’m weakening myself to strengthen you, I’m getting a new strength that I wouldn’t have gotten otherwise. Well, I’m giving you another example. It’s more of a justice issue. You have wealth, you’ve got power, you’ve got assets. You don’t feel that way, but you do, compared to poor people in other parts of the world, and compared to poor people in other parts of this town. Now you can hold on to all your money, you can hold on to all your time, you can hold on to all your power, right? So you hold on to your riches, and they just they perish in poverty, or you can start to give up your riches in various ways, you can start to share your riches, you can start to invest your time, you can start to invest your money charitably. And you, in other words, hold on to your riches, they stay poor, give up your riches, and they begin to come up, enriches them, but you’ll find some new and real kind of riches. When Jesus Christ gave Himself away on the cross, to win us, He then got the name which is above every other name. He deserves, rightly, far more honor for having lost His honor. He has a kind of honor that only comes from somebody who is willing to give up all of His honor and glory. Now, you go, live that way. At the end of his great book was a series of radio talks, Mere Christianity. CS Lewis says this: “The principle runs through all of life from top to bottom. Give up yourself and you will find your real self. Lose your life and you will save it. Submit it to death, death of your ambitions and favorite wishes every day. Submit with every fiber of your being and you will find eternal life. Keep back nothing. Nothing that you have not given away will really ever be yours. Nothing in you that has not died will ever be rationed to dead. Look for yourself. And you will find in the long run, only hatred, loneliness, despair, rage, ruin and decay. But look for Christ, and you will find Him and with Him, everything else thrown in.” See, that’s what Jesus Christ did on the cross. Now, you take up your cross and follow him.
Let’s pray: So Father, we thank you for not only the simple profundity of what your Son did for us on the cross, but the vision for what a life lived in the shadow of the cross would look like. Make us a community of people who live life in the shadow of the cross, so filled with your love that they can give, where they can give their money, where they give their freedom away, where they can give their life away, and thereby find greater freedom, greater wealth and greater life. We pray this in Jesus name, Amen.











What We Are Becoming: Transforming Love




Love, the Most Excellent Way

This morning Scripture reading comes from 1 Corinthians 13:1–13.

  If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal. If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing. Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away. For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears. When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put the ways of childhood behind me. For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known. And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. This is the word of the Lord.


When you hear that passage read, you look around for the people in the tuxes and the long dresses because, maybe right, and many of you have heard this but only ever in a wedding, maybe even have heard someone teach on this, but probably only at a wedding. And there’s nothing wrong with that. Not that there’s anything wrong with that because it’s fine to apply this to marriage. But I want you to know, it has nothing to do with what Paul had in his mind when he wrote this. In fact, the wonderful elevated verses 4–7, “Love is patient, love is kind,” is basically when Paul wrote it, it was at least partly ironic, because if you read the rest of the letter to this Corinthian church, you’ll know that they were not patient. They were not kind, they were not humble in any way. And what Paul’s doing when he makes that list is, he’s actually criticizing them. He’s coming after them. He’s admonishing them. He’s, trying to convict them. Why? Because for all of their gifts, for all of their activity, for even for all their morality, they didn’t have the marks of a supernaturally changed heart. This text is not about marriage, though it can be applied to marriage, of course. It’s about how you get and what is a supernatural changed heart.
See, most of us know a lot about how to restrain a life. We started to get in trouble because of something we’re doing and we get scared and in a sweat with our minds filled with the consequences of what might happen, we change we say, Oh, we’ve changed, but those consequences go away. And so often we snap back the way we were. Human nature without supernatural intervention is like a rubber ball that you can squish down smaller, but the minute you take the pressure off, it snaps right back because it was constrained. The rubber ball was constrained and restrained. It wasn’t actually changed. It wasn’t reshaped. And this is all about that. This text is about how easy it is to miss and not have a supernaturally changed heart. And you say, “Well, this is very different.” We’ve been talking about the rise campaign. This is that this is a new series. Well, it’s a new series Yes. But it’s not that different. Here’s the reason why. This is a whole series on what is a supernaturally changed heart and but this is the reason why we’re bringing it up right now.
We’ve been talking about how, what we think God is calling us to do in the city over the next decade. We want to see the body of Christ exponentially grow and we have said that we believe that will serve the city in so many ways. We can foresee more humane workplaces and we can see art with more hope in it and we can see people not using their money selfishly and the poor are lifted up. But none of that’s going to happen if our numbers grow, and our lives don’t actually change, if you have growth in numbers, but you don’t have supernatural change, then none of that’s going to happen. And that’s why we’re looking at this now. So, what is the supernaturally changed heart? The only way to find out when anything is, sometimes to contrast it with what isn’t it or what it isn’t. So, let’s take a look at what Paul does in the first few verses he shows us what a supernaturally changed heart is in two things that it is not and mustn’t be confused with.
And then secondly, we’ll see what it is. So, verses 1–3. Two things that supernaturally charged heart is not and then verses 4–8, what it is. Now, the first thing that it’s not, and it mustn’t be confused with is, a supernaturally changed heart is not the same as talented, successful ministry. It’s not the same as talented, successful ministry. Look at verse 2. This is a list of spiritual, you might say, gifts or talents. It says, “If I have the gift of prophecy, can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, if I have faith that can move mountains.” Now, that’s just a list of, you know, it’s an illustrative list. But if you look at chapter 12, you’ll see that the Corinthian church was filled with people that were incredibly gifted and talented. Corinth was an urban center; it was a financial center. And through history, urban centers, big cities, financial centers, cultural centers have attracted very ambitious and talented people. And very often in cities, you have some of the most talented, ambitious people there are, and they weren’t in Corinth and they came into the church.
The gift of prophecy was the miraculous ability to get revelation from God and there’s a lot of debate about what does that mean and what is that happening today? Well, Paul’s not talking about that here. He talks about it elsewhere. And so we’re not going to talk about that right here. It’s just one of the gifts. Then secondly, can fathom all mysteries and knowledge. Now, that’s Pauline language for being a teacher to fathom the mysteries. And knowledge means to master the Scripture and to teach it. And then it says, If I have faith that can move mountains. Now, that’s not just the ordinary faith that you need in order to be saved. That’s visionary faith. It’s inspirational faith. It’s the kind of faith that inspires groups of people. It’s a leadership gift. And so what Paul’s doing here is and you can see more of these things. If you go through the rest of the book of Corinthians, he’s making a list of all the talents and the gifts that the Corinthian church had. They were so successful, they were so productive. They were so gifted, they were so talented.
And then Paul pivots and says, “but without love, without love,” and we’re going to get to that as we get on, but, without a supernaturally changed heart, operating on love as its operating system, it’s worthless. It’s all worthless. He’s saying it’s possible to incredibly good at, gifted at, successful at ministry with all your gifts, and it’d be worthless. Or in another way to put it is, in the eyes of God, talent means virtually nothing compared to character. So, you know, you might say, well, how does that work? Well, it’s actually pretty important. verses 1, 2, and, 3 are things that the Corinthians have; verses 4, 5, 6, 7, are all the things that the Corinthians are not. In spite of the fact that they are talented and gifted, they are filled with what? Impatience. You still do the opposite, impatience and abrasiveness and jealousy and turf consciousness and pride and selfishness and they’re crabby. They’re gifted, they’re talented, and their churches are sure growing. I’m sure they’ve got great teachers, they’ve got great leaders, right? Faith that can move mountains, surely their church is growing. And yet Paul says, “In God’s eyes, it’s worthless.” If you don’t have a supernaturally changed heart and you can be effective in ministry, by the way, because of your talents, and not have that supernaturally changed heart.
Well, it was, we’ve to be careful here. We live in a city too, bigger than Corinth ever was. And we have some of the most talented people in the whole world here, in the world. And we all know that many of them, though they’re incredibly talented and we eat the gifts, you might say, the fruit of their talent. Yet many of them in their personal life are cruel, narcissistic, imperious and you know, we say, that just makes them colorful. What we actually do is, we excuse their lack of character because their gifts are so wonderful and we’re all eating the fruit of their gifts, maybe music or sports or in the arts or in business, we’re all eating their fruits, even though in their character, so we make excuses for their lack of character because of their gifts but that’s not what happens in the kingdom of God. It must not happen, it does not happen in the kingdom of God.
See, keep this in mind. At the very end of chapter 12, Paul says, “Seek the gifts,” which means he’s not against talent, he’s not against giftedness. I have seen churches that don’t want gifted people in them. You know why? Out of envy, okay, they don’t want them. Paul’s not like that. But here’s what he’s saying. Do not mistake talent and giftedness and brilliance and leadership and all those things. Do not mistake those things for grace. Don’t mistake gifts for grace. Don’t mistake talent for character, because he says, “I don’t care whether you’re such a good preacher, that you’re drawing multitudes, or you’re such a good leader, that millions of people are being touched by you, if you are envious, if you’re angry, if you’re anxious, if inside your heart is not been changed, then in God’s eyes, it’s valueless, it’s worthless.
Now, you know, we’re going to explain some of the reasons why, but let me just end here with a kind of warning, especially and just for a second. For those of us who are real active in this church, some of you are community group leaders, some of you are voluntary, you do a lot of work here, some of you are on the staff, you know, some of you are in ministry, you know, professional ministry, that kind of thing. This is warning particularly for you. Paul is saying, “Do not think that giftedness and grace in the heart are the same thing. God does not respect, does not value, skill and talent of the mind and the hand, as much as grace in the heart. And don’t mistake them. You say, “Well, how could you mistake them?” How can I mistake them? I’ll tell you exactly how it happens. Let’s just say you’re leading your community group and people say, “Oh, you’ve helped me so much. You know, you’ve listened to my questions, and you’ve helped me study the Bible, just helped me so much, or you’re on staff here, or you’re in ministry, and people say, “Oh, you’ve helped me so much.” And when you see that, you feel good, you should feel good. But then what you do, it’s very easy to say, “so God is with me.”
When actually you’ve got no prayer life, you’re filled with anxiety, and pride, and anger, and resentment yourself. Your heart’s nowhere, but you’ve been helping people see. And you say, “Well, I guess God’s okay with me.” Not necessarily, why? Listen. If somebody is in your path, and they need help, and God sees that you’ve got the talent to help them, why couldn’t you help them with your talent, even though your heart is not near him, even though your heart is far from him. Don’t mistake, the operation of gifts for grace. A supernaturally changed heart is not identical with talent, giftedness, and ministry. But secondly, that’s verse 2, here’s the second thing it’s not, verse 3. This actually, I think is even more, more counter-intuitive for us. Look at verse 3. What do we have there? This time, instead of three things, we have two things. “If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship, that I may boast.” Now, what’s that? Well, the first one is easy. Here’s a person who’s being so generous to the poor. They’re not just being giving, token, you know, kind of charity, but someone giving so generously to the poor, that it’s actually affecting their lifestyle. It’s possible that Paul is talking about a person who goes into voluntary poverty, who could live far higher and better, but goes into a sense of virtually voluntary poverty in order to give away so much to the poor. That’s what’s called a virtue. We call that social justice, living justly.
Now, the second one is a little harder to interpret. Some of you if you’ve been to weddings, you probably remember when they got to this verse, it said, “If I give away all that I possess to the poor and give my body to be burned, right, give my body to the flames, you’ve probably seen that translation. This one says, “body to hardship that I may boast.” As there often is questions about translation in the text here, on this going to say as far as I know, the best way to read this is just what the older way. And that is to say, it said, “If I was willing to die for my faith, I was only willing to go to the stake for my faith.” If I was willing to assert and identify myself as a Christian, even if that meant persecution.
Now, when Paul says, giveaway to the poor, doesn’t he believe we should give to the poor? Absolutely. And when Paul’s says even if I would give my, even if I would die for my faith, doesn’t Paul think we should be courageous and testify to our faith, even if it means persecution and death? Of course he does. And yet, what does he do? He says, even if I was willing to die for the faith, even if I gave away everything to the poor, and I had that kind of just living and that kind of, you know, the courage, but I have not love, it means nothing. Now, here’s what’s going on here. This is a virtue list. Aristotle talked about the virtues, his four cardinal virtues, virtues were prudence and self-control and courage and justice, and the other philosophers and classical teachers had different virtues but the virtues was basically morality. And here’s Paul saying, you can be incredibly moral, absolutely moral and still not have a supernaturally changed heart, it mean nothing. Now how in the world could that possibly be? How could it be? And the answer is actually verse 1. Now, when you read verse 1, most people look at verse 1, and they say, “Oh, this is all about tongues.” You know, if I speak in the tongues of men and angels, let me say, “What’s tongues and well,” he doesn’t explain and therefore I’m not going to explain.
But here’s what it says, “but have not love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal.” Now, why did Paul choose that symbolism? You know, a gong, a cymbal, why don’t you do that? And the answer is, as far as I can see, here’s what he’s saying. Yes, a supernaturally changed heart will always issue in a moral life, but you can have a moral life without having a supernaturally changed heart. And here’s the reason why. In Corinth, it was a religious center and there were a number of pagan cults that worshipped various gods, that had their kind of cathedrals, in the sense their temples in Corinth. So you had temples to various gods, but one of the marks of the religious rituals and the worship of those gods was the procession that every one of those temples, especially a couple of them, we know very often that what, you didn’t just go into the temple, but you came out of the temple and you marched around in a procession around the town, around the city, and everybody wore their finery. And there was always gongs and cymbals in the pagan worship. And the purpose of it was to get the attention of the god, to say to the god, “Look at how much we honor you. Listen to our prayers. See how much we venerate you.”
Now for Paul to say, you might say, I’m a Christian and I’m gifted in ministry and I’m working in a church, and I’m even willing to give away a lot of my money. And I’m willing to stand up for my faith and witness for my faith, even if it means persecution. And it all be nothing. Why? Because it’s exactly like the gong and the cymbal. Okay, let me say it again. Paul is saying you could obey the ten commandments, you could get to church every week, you could be sexually, incredibly moral, you could not just give some of your money away but huge percentages of it away to the poor, you could be true to your faith and witness to your faith to the point of persecution. And it’d be basically being done for the same reason that the pagans crying those cymbals, why it’s your way of saying to God, “Look at how good I am. Look at what I’m doing for you. Listen to me, favor me. Bless me. Answer my prayers,” that you’re actually not doing it for god, you’re doing it for yourself and you’re trying to get other people’s respect. You’re trying to get your own respect.
Look at me, you know, in the Pride and Prejudice, the Jane Austen novel, there’s a set of sisters and the one, the most unattractive of the sisters in more ways than one is Mary. And Mary, according to Jane Austen, according to the narrator and the writer, Mary is the most Christian looking, the most religious, of all the girls, and she’s always lecturing them on what is our Christian duty and why aren’t you reading your Bible more and why aren’t you being more moral. And this is what Jane Austen said about why she was so religious. It said, “Mary in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments of which she was impatient for display. It gave her a pedantic air in a conceited manner.” In other words, her religiosity was all about her. It was a way of saying, “See, I’m special. See, I’m a good person. In fact, I’m better than you.” It’s a gong, it’s a cymbal and here’s what’s so ironic. It’s basically another form of self-centeredness. Put it like this, giving your money away, is externally, publicly very sacrificial, suffering for your faith, you know, taking it on the chin for your faith is externally, publicly sacrificial. But what Paul is saying here is that you could be like that, you could be, you might say, volitionally, behaviorally, very, very sacrificial and unselfish in your behavior, but in your heart, impatient, unkind, envious, grumpy, crabby, selfish, irascible, manipulative. And, here’s the reason why.
Because, there’s a kind of morality that doesn’t put a stake through the heart of self-centeredness. It just nurtures it. It cultivates it, because everything you’re doing is for you, just like Mary was doing everything. It’s not for God. It’s not for your neighbor, you’re helping the poor, but not for the poor’s sake, for your sake. You’re going to worship and praising, not for God’s sake, but for your sake. You’re doing out of a sense of emptiness. And you’re trying to fill that emptiness with respect and trying to say, “God, now you have to favor me, and other people have to favor me, and I have to favor myself. Look, what a good person I am.” Just like gong, a cymbal. It’s hollow, externally selfish, internally, and anybody who lives with you can see it. That you’re grumpy, the irascible, that you’re selfish, that you’re manipulative, that you’re anxious, that you’re vain. And Paul says, that shows not a supernaturally changed heart. And basically, he’s showing that’s a morality that does not come from love. Well, you say, “Okay, you’ve been saying ‘Love, love, love.’ All right, what is love?” Well, it’s pretty simple. Self-centeredness says, “me-first;” love says, “you-first.” Self-centeredness says, “My needs are more important, so I’ll trample on yours to fulfill mine.” Love says, “Your needs are more important. So I’ll sacrifice mine to fulfill yours.” Simple as that.
If you have in your heart, a need to get God’s favor, to get other people’s favor, and I feel like I’ve got to do all these things in order to make sure that it comes in, you’re doing it for yourself. It’s me-first. It’s all about you. And that means that even if externally in order to be moral, to be thought of as moral, for you to think of yourself as moral, to present to God yourself as a moral and moral person, you’re going to be unselfish in these external big waves. But internally, you’re going to be just, everybody’s selfish, everybody’s proud, everybody’s unhappy, everybody’s irritable, everybody’s worried, everybody’s ungracious as everybody else, sexually. And that’s the reason why you should not be, let me tell you this, you should not be surprised when great people that you have so much respect for, suddenly seem to have some kind of moral collapse.
Like for example, it can be a public servant, a man or a woman who’s just served four years in public service, usually meaning government, maybe politics or civic leadership, in some way nonprofits. And whereas everybody else that they went to Harvard, Yale, Princeton with, is making far more money, they get lower salaries, and they’re just giving to everybody, and everybody has so much respect for them, or there’s people in ministry, “Oh, look at them. They’re preaching the word.” And then, suddenly you find out, “Oh, they embezzled, oh, they committed adultery. Oh, they did something they were, how could that happen?” I’ll tell you how it happens. If your morality is external, then you’ve actually not put a stake through the heart of your self-centeredness, but you’ve been nurturing it. See, you’ve been actually feeling better and better about yourself. You’re doing all this stuff so that you can feel good about yourself because, it pays, all your goodness pays. And yet, that means, you’ll grow in self-pity and that public servant will say, nobody knows how much I’ve sacrificed for this community. Nobody knows and so there’s opportunity to make a deal or cheat or make some money or have an affair you say, “I deserve it.”
See, external morality without a supernaturally changed heart is a house of cards. It’s just a house of cards because basically you look unselfish on the outside, but inside your every bit is grumpy, you’re competitive. You’re looking at other people, you’re envious. You’re boastful. You’re, you know, you’re self righteous in many ways. You’re self-absorbed, and that’s going to come back, and at some point it’s going to erupt. Morality without a supernaturally changed heart is a house of cards. So we’re in trouble, are we not? The real question is, how do you get a supernaturally changed heart? Don’t mistake active ministry for it. Don’t mistake moral goodness for it, moral discipline virtues for it. Well, what is it? Well, it’s love, and here’s what Paul’s doing. When he gets to verse 4–7, almost 8, you know, when he gets there, it looks like he’s describing love. Love is patient and kind, it doesn’t envy, it doesn’t boast. It’s not proud. It doesn’t dishonor it, that means it’s courteous. It’s not self-seeking. It’s not easily angered, it doesn’t keep grudges, it keeps no record of wrong. It does not delight in evil, rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres, love never fails. And the way this is usually read and the way this is usually preached frankly, is okay. It’s not enough just to be good. Verse 3, it’s not enough just to be active in the church, verse 2, got to be loving. And so you say, okay, there it is, I got to do those things and that’ll then be okay.
And that’s miss the whole point of the way in which Paul puts this. Paul doesn’t say, “Love consists of patience. He’s not actually describing an abstract principle at all here. He doesn’t say, “Well, if you want to be loving, you got to do these things.” He doesn’t say that. He said, “love is.” He personifies love. Love is patient. Especially when you get down, when it says, “love does not delight in evil.” Wait a minute, that is, talking to itself loves a person. Love protects, love trusts, love hopes. You say, “Well, what he really means is, if you are a loving person, you need to trust, if you are a loving person, you need to help,” Well, yeah, but if somebody says and one of the reasons why this is often read at weddings is because it has an elevated tone when you say, “love is patient,” if you want to love, that consists of being patient, if you want to love. So, it’s one thing to say love consists of forgiveness, another thing to say, love keeps no record of wrongs. That’s more poetic. It’s more lyrical, it’s more elevated. It’s one of the reasons why we read it at elevated events, like weddings.
But you’re, I think we’re missing the point Paul is making something, a very crucial point for us by depicting love as a person. And there’s two reasons I think he does it. And if you grasp this, you’re on your way. The first is, he depicts it as a person because that’s the only way love ever comes into your life. Nobody learns to love by trying. You only learn to love because someone picks you up and loves you. Love is an active force, not a passive set of principles or practices. Love is an act of force. No one learns to love by trying. You only learn to love because someone loves you, someone picks you up.
Now, by the way, one of the reasons why this is literally true, one of the reasons why orphanages in the west for infants have pretty much died out, you know, in other words, an infant and an orphanage, that’s firstly not there. Why? Because we know that even if you just keep the infant in the crib and pick the infant up to change him or her, or feed him or her, a third of them die. Half of them have mental problems as they grow up. What every baby needs is, to be constantly held, constantly cued over, constantly delighted and constantly kissed. Literally somebody has to pick you up and just hug you and love you, or you can’t love. You can forget all these other lists of things. Of course these things are helpful. I want to be a more loving person. Here’s a great list fine, but unless you’ve met love in the form of a person, you will never be able to be loving just by looking at a list.
Before love is something you do, it has to be someone you’ve met. Before love is something you do, it’s got to be someone you’ve met. And if you haven’t met someone who’s so filled the deepest part of your heart with love, the deepest part of your soul with love, so you are short of that love. When you move on, the world is so called do good things, you’re doing it to use people in order to fill that. Everything you do, even every good deed you do, every charitable thing you do, if it’s not coming from a fullness of love, where you’re just loving others as you’ve been loved, if instead you’re not sure of that, then everything you’re doing is actually for yourself as a way of just trying to steal love and respect from other people. And it’s all about you.
And that’s one of the reasons why Paul puts this in the form of love. Unless you’ve met someone who loves you to the skies, fills you with love, there’s all the lists matter. Ah, but here’s the question. Where do you get that? Now, of course, by the way, your parents, I hope in many of your cases, your parents were probably the very first persons to lift you up and, and love you. But here’s what Paul is saying. I don’t think Paul is wrong when he says love does not. Love always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres and never fails. Now, you could read that first about you. And you could say, “Oh, okay, it means that if I’m loving, I need to protect trust, hope, persevere. And if I ever fail to do that, then I’m failing to love.” Well, you could look at it that way. But actually, there’s another way to look at it. You need love like that. We are so dependent on love that we can’t bear to be loved by someone who will fail us, who will not persevere, who will not hope and where are you going to get that from? Your parents? Well, I want you to know, I’m a parent, I just, FYI, parents are flawed people, they will let you down. They will disappoint. They won’t always persevere, they won’t always hope. They won’t always trust. And even if they’re really good ones, they’re going to die. They’re going to lose. They’re going to leave you. They’re in that sense, their love will fail.
Well, you say, “I can do it to my spouse.” Well, spouses are made of the same human stuff as parents. “Oh, how about my children? I find it in my children.” Well, you just, you’ll just destroy them if you actually try to smother them with that kind of freight. Where are you going? But we need someone, we need a love that so always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres and never fails that it fills us up so that we’re able to move out in the world and fullness to love others rather than in emptiness in order to use them in order to get some kind of respect. Well, then, here’s the question. Who can give that kind of love?
And the second reason I think Paul personifies love is he has a person in mind. Because, the first word is love is patient, but the Greek word is makrothumei, which literally means love is long suffering. How could Paul write that without thinking of the one who said, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” The man who suffered for us patiently? Love does not keep a record of wrongs. How can he, Paul write that without thinking of the one who on the cross said, “Father, forgive them, they don’t know what they’re doing.” Love always hopes. How could Paul write that without remembering that? You know, here’s this thief dying on the cross. I mean, he’s being killed at the end of all of his hopes, right? He’s got no hope left. And this guy next to Him says, “Hey, I’m the Messiah, the Son of God, and today you will be with me in paradise.” Nobody else in the world can say that to you. Nobody. Everybody else says, “At death, my love fails, when I die love fails, when you die, my love fails, but Jesus doesn’t, or Love never fails. When Jesus Christ is on the cross, looking down at all of His friends who’ve either betrayed, denied or forsaken Him, and looking at everybody else around Him who’s supposed to be dying for there, but they’re jeering at Him, and they’re mocking at Him, and in the greatest act of love in the history of the world, He stayed. He didn’t fail us. He stayed until He said, It is finished, meaning I did it. I’ve accomplished it. I’ve saved them, I payed for their sins. He never fails,

    The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose,
    I will not, I will not desert to his foes;
    That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,
    I’ll never, no, never, no, never forsake!

He was forsaken on the cross, so that He can never, He’ll never forsake you. If you read verses 4–7, first not as something you must do, but a kind of love that saved you. If you read verses 4–8, first of all, as the love that saved you, that will humble you out of your self-centeredness, and it’ll affirm you out of your neediness and will so fill you that then you can reread this as a way to live.
And only then Christian friends, don’t mistake gifts for grace. And stop, look, all of us have partly changed heart. None of us have hearts. They’re anywhere near as changes we think they are. Look at this list and use it on yourself; ask the person in the world who knows you the best and say, “Am I more patient? Am I more kind? Am I less envious? Am I more happy? Am I less worried than I was two years ago? Because, if you have a supernaturally changed heart, you’re growing if you’re alive spiritually, and you’re becoming more and more like that, and if you say, “no, I’m stalled,” well, then wait a minute. Don’t settle for anything less than a supernaturally changed heart. And those of you who are thinking about Christianity, exploring it, please don’t think Christianity is all about just getting more moral. It is about meeting the one whose love will transform you and you will be born again.
Let’s pray: Thank you Father, I thank you for the Lord’s Supper because here we can have in our lives re-enacted what your Son did on the cross for us, perfectly patient love, absolute long suffering, love that persevered, love that never failed. We pray that you would re-ignite the same kind of love in our heart as we perceive and conceive and think about what you have done for us. In Jesus name we pray, Amen.




Love and Forgiveness

This morning’s reading is from Romans 12:9–21:

  Love must be sincere. Hate what is evil; cling to what is good. Be devoted to one another in love. Honor one another above yourselves. Never be lacking in zeal, but keep your spiritual fervor, serving the Lord. Be joyful in hope, patient in affliction, faithful in prayer. Share with the Lord’s people who are in need. Practice hospitality. Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse. Rejoice with those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn. Live in harmony with one another. Do not be proud, but be willing to associate with people of low position. Do not be conceited. Do not repay anyone evil for evil. Be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everyone. If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone. Do not take revenge, my dear friends, but leave room for God’s wrath, for it is written: “It is mine to avenge; I will repay,” says the Lord. On the contrary: “If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink. In doing this, you will heap burning coals on his head.” Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good. This is the word of the Lord.


By the way, I can’t go by without mentioning this campaign. This is a thrilling moment for us. Kathy said recently, we’ve been through four campaigns in twenty seven years, and she said, rightly, helpful to say rightly so that this campaign has been more about the vision and less about money than any other one. And the most important number is the fact that three, four times more people have embraced it through the pledging and the committing, the overall number we’ll get there. The key is the breadth of participation and this really is just a beginning of this. This is something we’re going to be constantly coming back and reporting out on the money parts over the fun part begins. So, thank you so much.
And connected to that we’ve been talking about how if we grow the churches and the body of Christ in this city that could really enhance the city we were talking about, how we might have more people using their money less selfishly, the poor being raised up, more humane workplaces. The arts expressing more hope, all the things we think will change the city. But that, listen, if our numbers grow, but our hearts and lives don’t change, no, that’s going to happen. And last week we read 1 Cor 13, which of course, it’s fine to read that at weddings. But when Paul was writing the 1 Cor 13 chapter, he was not thinking about weddings or marriages. What he was doing was he was looking at a group of people and he said, “You’re busy, you’re active, you’re religious, and you’re moral, but your hearts haven’t been changed from the inside out by the Holy Spirit.
And he gave a list of characteristics. And he said, you know, you can be very religious and very moral. But if you’re impatient, if you’re bitter, if you’re unkind, if you’re harsh, he made a whole list of things. Love is patient, love is kind, it’s very famous. It’s always read at marriages. But that what’s brilliant about that passage is it’s saying, you can be very religious and even very moral and very active in your church and still be anything, credibly impatient, irritable, bitter person, actually happens all the time. So what we’re going to do is we’re going to, over the next few weeks look at those various characteristics that Paul says, hese are the marks of a supernaturally changed heart, and each week we’re going to look at one. We’re not going to stay in 1 Cor 13. We’re going to go to other passages that illuminate the various traits. And so, the one we’re starting with, which is, the one if you were here last week, you remember, if you know 1 Cor 13, you know, love is patient, and it doesn’t keep a record of wrongs.
Now this incredible passage, this explosive passage, every time I read it, I go, “Oh, my word!” The first four verses, vs. 9–13, five verses, verses 9–13 are all about patience and gracefulness before life in general, patience and graciousness before life in general. Then verses 14–21, is talking about forgiveness and love, before missing treatment in particular. And finally, we have to ask the question, “Where do we get the power for our life, this patient, this loving, and this brave? So, first let’s look at the first few verses, and see what it says about patience and graciousness before life in general. Quick summary, verses 9 and 10 says, serve other people’s needs before your own, not because you have to but out of love. Verse 11, says, serve the Lord, not because you have to, but out of internal fervor and hoping and joy. And then verse 12 says, Be patient in affliction when things go wrong, be patient, and that word patient means enduring, but because it’s flanked with prayer and joy and hope, again, it’s saying be patient be enduring but never in a begrudging merely dutiful way. But instead, there’s got to be an internal joy and hope that makes you able to be very patient and very calm and very poised even when everything’s blowing up around you.
Now, what’s Paul talking about in these first few verses? Even though the word is not used here, in parallel passages, it comes up, and I think I’m going to bring it up because it’s so concrete. In some ways, these are abstractions. What does it mean to be patient? What does it mean to be impatient? The impatience and patience are kind of abstract concepts. But in the Bible, to be impatient in heart, is to be a grumbler. Paul is saying, “Don’t be a grumbler. Don’t grumble, don’t have a heart of grumbling.” In the Old Testament, grumbling was one of the main sins of Israel, that whenever things went wrong, they grumbled against the circumstances, which means they were grumbling against the God behind the circumstances. And when you get to the New Testament, 1 Cor 10, and Jas 5 also talk about the sin of grumbling. But Jas 5, by the way, is a best parallel passage for this passage, even though it’s short. Jas 5:8, 9, 10 says, “Be patient, don’t grumble, for God the judge is at the door.”
Don’t grumble for God is on His judgment throne. This is a parallel passage and here’s the reason why. Down in verse 19, it says, “Leave room for God’s wrath.” Now, that’s a very strange thing to say, leave room for God’s wrath. God’s wrath is the wrath that He will pour out on judgement day and on judgment day everybody will get what they deserve; on judgement day, everybody will get what they deserve. And that’s when God’s wrath is poured out. And so, Paul, by referring to this is doing the same thing that James’s is saying and that is, if you’re an impatient person, if when things go wrong, you’re not patient in affliction, if you’re not joyful and hopeful and poise when things go wrong, instead you’re really grumbling and unhappy and grumpy in every way, it’s because actually you’re sitting in God’s chair. Get out of God’s chair.
Now, how does that work? All right, here’s how it works. Your plans blow up, things go wrong, some crucial goals, you don’t reach, they fail. They don’t, never reach them, maybe, you have some huge disappointments in life. How do you respond? If you sit in God’s chair, that means that you are saying, “I know how things should go. I know what I deserve. I know what everybody else around me deserves. I know exactly how my life has to go.” And it’s not going that way. So, you’re sitting in God’s chair and you’re absolutely sure that you know better than God, how I should go. You know what everybody deserves. You know what should happen? You know what justice is? You know what fairness is? So you’re sitting in God’s chair and as a result, you have a grumbling heart, not a patient heart. What’s a grumbling heart? Well, let me give you some signs of a grumbling heart. Okay. One of them is scornfulness. You know what scornfulness is? Scornfulness is.… This is scornfullness. New York is filled with scornfulness. I know best. I know how everything should go. I know what everybody deserves. I know what you deserve. I know what I deserve. Yeah. Self pity is a mark of a grumbling heart. Lots of self pity, anxiety. Why? Because you see, you know how life has to go and you’re not sure that God who is in the chair of the world is going to get it right. Worry is saying, “I know better than God.” Otherwise you wouldn’t be worried. There’s anxiety. There’s self pity. There’s scorn. There’s disdain. What are the marks of a patient heart?
A patient heart is something, is someone who is joyful in hope. What does that mean? A patient heart is always poised under pressure, always calm, no matter what happens has a joy that is not based on circumstances and therefore is inextinguishable, but most of all, has hope. What does that mean? It means, you know, Psa 30, where it says, “weeping may tarry for the night, but joy comes in the morning.” A Christian who understands what the Bible teaches in general about everything knows this. Joy is always on the way. It might be a long way off, but goodness and glory, you believe in Jesus, goodness and glory is in your future, maybe farther away in your future than you would like it to be, but the simple fact is, no, no, God is no man’s debtor. God is no woman’s debtor and a person who’s heart is filled with that sort of thing is patient; you get off the throne. You’re living a patient life. Don’t grumble.
And if some of you say, “Oh my goodness, you know, I can’t believe what you know, that’s your job you preachers, you’re making me feel guilty about grumbling, everybody grumbles, everybody grumble, sometimes, especially in New York. You get on the subway at rush hour, you grumble with them and they’re grumbling at you. You know, I mean, kind of what’s the big deal about grumble? Grumble? Grumble? If you were sitting on a sofa, watching television, and you notice that at the other end of the sofa, let’s say, it’s a fabric sofa, on the other end of the sofa, you see a flame shoot up and you realize that the other end of the sofa is on fire. What do you say? “Well, it’s over, at the other end of the sofa. I can watch my TV, you know?” No, you get off the sofa. You don’t sit around and say, “Well, the whole sofa is not on fire.” Do you know what grumbling is? It’s how fire, just a little, little little spot of it.
Kathy and I have one of our favorites. If you’ve been around, you know, one of our favorite books is The Great Divorce by CS Lewis. CS Lewis is, it’s a fiction book about a busload of people from hell, who come to the outskirts of heaven. People from heaven come down to try to get the people from hell to leave hell to go to heaven, but most of them won’t. And it’s Louis’s way of getting across the fact that hell is always a choice. And there’s a narrator. This is all fiction now, you understand? There’s a narrator, who’s walking around with a guide and they’re listening in on the conversations between the people from hell and the people from heaven. And this narrator is walking around with a guide. And at one point they listen to this woman who begin to talk. She’s from hell; that’s what she says. She’s stuck. She’s meeting a woman who’s from heaven, who she used to know back on earth and she says, “Oh my dear, I’ve had such a dreadful time. I don’t know how I ever got here at all. I was coming with Eleanor Stone and we were to meet at the corner of Sixth Street. I made it perfectly plain, because I know what she is like. And I’ve told her, once I told her thousand times I would not meet her outside that dreadful Marjorie bank’s woman home, but after the way she treated me, of course, I wouldn’t want to be there. I’ve been dying to tell you because I felt sure you tell me I acted rightly. So, no, no, no, wait a minute, I’m not done. I tried living with her. When I first came, and it was all fixed up. She was to do the cooking and I was to look after the house and I did think I was going to be comfortable after all I’ve been through, but no, she was so absolutely selfish, not a particle of sympathy for anything but herself. And then they walk on. And the narrator turns to his guide and says, “I am troubled sir, because that unhappy creature doesn’t seem to me the sort of soul that ought to be in hell in danger damnation. She’s not wicked. She’s only a silly, garrulous old woman who got into the habit of grumbling. And the guide says, “Well, the question is whether she’s a grumbler or only a grumble.” The narrator says, “But how can there be a grumble without a grumbler?” “Oh, my God,” he said, “You’ve had the experience. It begins with a grumbling mood. And you yourself still distinct from it, perhaps criticizing it, you can still repent and come out of it again. But there may come a day. When you can do that no longer, and there’s no you left to criticize the mood, nor even to enjoy it, but just the grumble itself going on forever.”
And in the Preface to Paradise Lost, his Preface to Paradise Lost, CS Lewis says, “A vote for Satan is a vote for hell and a vote for hell is a vote for endless autobiography.” Endless autobiography, that’s grumbling, that staying in God’s chair. It’s saying, “It’s not fair. It’s not fair.” I don’t deserve this. This isn’t the way it supposed to go. It’s not going to go, it’s an endless autobiography. And I don’t think, this should have, if only this had happened then everything, endless autobiography what slavery and it’s a flame at the other end of the sofa, and it won’t go for a whole thing until you’re nothing but a grumble. Don’t you dare think it’s not dangerous? God does not condemn something unless it’s bad for you. Just like your doctor doesn’t say, “Don’t eat that food unless it harms your health,” God doesn’t say, “Don’t do it. The judge is at the door,” unless it’s the worst possible thing for you to eating up the fabric of your happiness, your relationships, your heart. So there we have something that’s crucial. Are you patient and gracious and poised and able to let go of your goals?
Are you humble enough to say, “Hey, I don’t know what’s best for me, or you’re going to rigidly Hold on? So, that’s patience and graciousness for life in general. But Paul gets down to the second half, and he goes into a particular kind of trouble that happens to us, a particular kind of difficulty that really is hard. And that is specific mistreatment when someone wrongs you.
Now, what’s so great about this passage, which is verses 14–21, classic passage is, it lays out a principle. And then it gives you five incredibly practical ways to realize that principle. So, there’s the principle and there’s the practice. What’s the principle? Verse 21. Let me read it. And then, let me just paraphrase it, so you see the magnitude of it. Do not be overcome by evil but overcome evil with good. Do not be overcome by evil but over come evil with good. Now the word overcome is a military word, oh, you military people. It means to defeat, it means to conquer. And so, what’s intriguing here is there’s only two possibilities. Either you will be defeated by evil or you will conquer and defeat evil only by responding to it with good. So, we put it to another way. If when someone hurts you, you either hurt them back or want to see them hurt in your heart. If when someone hurts, you hurt them back or you maintain wanting to see them hurt in your heart. You’ve been defeated by evil. You have lost, evil won.
Say, well, how could that be? Let me give you three ways and there’s only three I can think of but there’s, I mean, I can handle it, today but there’s a lot more. Here’s the first one one is that when you when someone harms you and you want to hurt them back or you maintain, wanting to hurt them back, staying angry at them, even low level? The first thing is that distorts your relationships. If you maintain anger at somebody, even a low level anger, see most of us won’t call ourselves bitter. You know, because we know we’re not supposed to be bitter perhaps, or we don’t want to think of ourselves as bitter people. But if you maintain a low level anger, well, a low level enough that you don’t call it bitter. Well, it’s still there. it distorts your relationships. How so? Well, first of all, whenever you maintain anger towards someone, you tend to replay the tapes. You replay what the person did to you to sort of justify your anger. And when you do that, you always caricature them, you flatten them.
So for example, maybe somebody lied to you. So what do you think of them? How do you think of them? You say that person is just a liar. But what happens if you lie, because you lie too, and someone catches you, then you say, “Well, yes, I lied, but it’s complicated, you know, it doesn’t mean I’m a liar. It mean, I did lie, shouldn’t have lied. And here’s the reasons why, this person lied. You liar.” You will? Yeah. You know. So, you’re three dimensional. You’re complicated. You’re nuanced to that person’s flat caricature, wire. And that’s what happens if you stay angry at them, you flatten them, you caricature them and then everyone else in that category, it starts to distort your relationship with them. If you’re a man, and you’ve been hurt by a woman, really hurt by a woman, you stay angry at her, it’s going to affect your relationship with women.
And by the way, vice versa. Or somebody of another race, or somebody of another type, or somebody of another economic class. And it distorts your relationship with all of them because you flattened in your mind, which is a way of justifying your anger, that person and those people’s way of justifying why you’re angry, and it starts to distort your relationship with all kinds of people. Secondly, it not only distorts your relationships if you stay angry if you maintain that wanting to hurt the person, secondly, it distorts your relationship to yourself. Because it’s the other side when you when you replay the tapes and you think about what’s how that person wronged you, you not only think of what’s wrong with them and flatten them, but you also tend to feel noble; you puff yourself up, you airbrush yourself and you start to feel noble and you start to feel a certain amount of self pity and a certain amount of self-righteousness, “Boy, what I’ve been through? What people have done to me? What that person has done to me? And there is nothing that makes you more open to being cruel or dishonest than feeling self righteously, nobley put upon, if you’ve like I’ve suffered, nobody knows how much I’ve suffered and I look what I’ve had to put up with. It makes you open to temptation, you have an opportunity to do something cruel, you’ll do it. You have an opportunity to something maybe sort of dishonest but it gives you a leg up, you’ll do it. Why? Because you’ll say deep in your heart, “I deserve this.”
And so, you’re more open to evil, evil has won. And lastly, if you maintain that anger, not only does it distort your relationships, it distorts your self-image and your self-knowledge. But then thirdly, it almost never, I mean, probably almost always increases evil in the perpetrator, the perp. See, the perpetrator has done something wrong. So, what happens if you maintain anger at them? Well, they’re going to be a couple things you do. One is, you could just be cold to them, just avoid them so they never learn what they did wrong. Or, you confront them, you say, and you tell them what’s wrong with them, and you just try to shame them, and all that does is make them feel themselves more self righteous, like you’re the idiot. And so, they get worse and worse, evil wins. Evil wins in the world. Evil wins in the perpetrator, evil wins in you. So, it’s not so, you have to, you must defeat, and only can defeat evil if you respond to evil, not with hurting the person back, or even wanting that person to be hurt, but with good. You say, “Well, how do you do that?” I told you, this is a most incredibly practical passage.
Let’s take a look at five things. It tells you on how to overcome evil with good ready, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and they’re all in this section. Number 1, verse 14, “bless those who persecute you bless and do not curse.” Now, by the way, probably this means because Jesus says almost the same thing in Matt 5, where He says, “pray for those who persecute you.” That probably blessed means to pray for God’s blessing. And I think that this is an incredibly practical thing. You might be angry, you know, you’re really sinking into bitterness, you want to be free, you want to overcome evil, then one of the things to do is to start with the person who’s wronged you, you pray for them. You pray for God’s blessing on them. You pray, you pray for God to giving them help.
Now, what’s brilliant about this is so practical because there’s, it’s hard to stay angry with somebody if you’re praying for them. It’s really hard. Even if you say, “Oh, Lord, please open the eyes of that, idiot.” You’re on your way. I mean, you. It’s that’s progress. That’s progress. I mean, you’re on your way. And the minute you’ll turn the corner, to really be asking God for it to bring help down into somebody’s life that they need it. It’s hard to stay angry if you’re praying for that, but by the way, it’s also hard to stay angry with them unless you feel superior to them. It’s almost impossible to stay bitter at somebody or angry unless you feel like I would never do anything like that. And it’s almost impossible to stay feeling superior to people if you’re praying. I mean, if you’re really praying and you really have any idea who you’re praying to, there’s no way that you feel superior. So what happens is just praying for them, knocks down a superiority, turns your heart a little bit more. So, you’re starting to will them good, and it’s a huge first step. So number 1, “bless.” That is to say, pray God’s blessing.
Secondly, though, forgive. And we say, where’s the word “forgive?” Well, it’s actually, I’m glad it’s not here. Because people twist that word. I’m glad it’s a little more concrete. It says, “Do not repay anyone evil for evil. And don’t forget what Jesus says in Matt 5. NIV [inaudible] says, “Don’t kill people, but in your heart don’t hate them.” He says, “Don’t commit adultery in your heart.” Don’t lust. He goes right on down. You know, don’t steal but in your heart don’t envy, so he goes down and he says, “doing it in your heart is just like doing it out there, just the dip. In fact, the heart has been infected. Maybe you will or you won’t actually be able to express it in behavior, but the heart has been infected. Therefore, forgiveness means not only not taking revenge, but not taking revenge in your heart. And now let me give you two objections. The first thing some people say, “Wait a minute, wait a minute, look, I can forgive, but I can’t forget. I can forgive, but I can’t forget. You know what that actually means. I’m not going to directly retaliate. I’m going to root for somebody else to do it. See, if I forgive, see, what you’re probably doing is what I call Christian Voodoo, which means, in your heart, you’re sticking little pins in them. And you’re hoping something bad will happen to them. You’re hoping they don’t get into that get that job. You’re hoping they don’t get that promotion. And when things go bad for them, you go, “yes.” So, and so basically, yes, I’m not, when people say I forgave but I haven’t forgotten, you actually haven’t forgiven. What it really means is, I’m not directly trying to take revenge, but in my heart, I’m hoping that somebody does. I’m rooting for them to go.
And someone says, “Well, okay then, but here’s the problem. I can’t forgive because I’m too angry.” And my response to you would be, you’re too angry because you haven’t forgiven. It’s the other way around. You got totally reversed. You say, “Well, what do you mean by that?” Well, because forgiveness is a command. Mark 11:25, go read it and let your blood get curdled. Mark 11:25 Jesus says, “If you’re standing and you’re praying and you realize you have anything against anyone, forgive them.” Not wait till they come groveling to you crawling on their knees. If you are standing, praying and you realize you got something against anybody, forgive them right there. Now, that can’t be. Jesus can’t be commanding, you’d have an emotion. Guess why? Because, you can’t command emotions. Well, then what is He saying? Here’s what He’s saying. Forgiveness therefore has to be something you can grant before you feel it. Don’t wait to feel it in order to grant it. You have to grant it. If you’ll ever feel and what do you have to grant? Here’s what you do. You promise to refrain from three things.
Number one, you’re not going to directly retaliate yourself and try to hurt them. Number two, you’re not going to indirectly retaliate by running them down to other people. See, you say, “I’m not retaliating, I’m not retaliating against them,” but I’m going to tell everybody else how awful they are. Well, that’s memo that’s retaliation. All right. So number one, you promise not to try to hurt them. Number two, you promise not to try to run them down on everybody else. Number three, inside your heart when you’re tempted to put little pins, when you’re tempted to replay the tapes, when you’re tempted to go through your anger and nurse angry thoughts. You say, “No.” You turn aside. And if you do those three things, and those are matters of the will, dear friends that they’re not just the matters of emotion. If you promise it, those three things and you do those three things, you grant it before you feel it. After you granted it, you’ll start to feel it.
So, first of all, you pray for them. Number two, you forgive them. Number three, four and five. They’re very important. Number three is you don’t avoid them. Notice verse 18, as it is, if it is possible as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone. That’s great, how realistic. I’ve had people say to me, “Look, I’ve forgiven him, but I want nothing to do with him anymore,” which means you haven’t forgiven him, you’re retaliating, you’re, “cut them out of my life.” It says here, if possible, as far as it depends on you, see, the other person may say, “I don’t want to talk to you.” The other person might want to keep up a war. But you don’t contribute to that. You don’t stay away from them. You don’t lift a finger to contribute to any war at all. You are always open to relationship. You’re always seeking relationship if you can, but number three, that’s three. So, don’t avoid them.
Number four, give them what they need. You see the standard [inaudible], “if your enemy is hungry, feed him. If he’s thirsty, give him something to drink.” Now that’s, that’s fascinating. That means you don’t just forgive them and not retaliate. You give them what they need, you’re doing good to them. But look what carefully. It’s not just, you know, sending them gifts or something like that. It says, what do they need? And boy, this is nuanced. So, for example, let’s say you have a friend who’s an addict, but won’t admit he or she is an addict. Should you trust them? That’d be the worst thing for them. They don’t need that, that’s not good for them to trust them. Let’s just say a person is doing something and they’re not they don’t hurt you but they hurt other people.
Well, then you need to confront them. Why? Because they need it. It’s never loving to make it easy for someone to go on sinning. It’s never loving, to make it easy for somebody to go on sinning and therefore, those of you especially that have a kind of shy temperament, and then for you to say, “I forgive, and I’m not going to retaliate, and I’m not going to run them down to other people, and I’m not going to nurse the grudge in my heart.” Okay, so I’ve done everything. No, you haven’t? What if they need you to talk to them? What do they need you to confront them? So, I don’t want to do that. Well then, guess what? You’re not overcoming evil with good.
Okay. You’re not yeah, you’re not doing evil for evil, but you’re not over coming evil with good because you’re too cowardly to talk. But unless you forgive from the heart, before you confront, the confrontation will not be for their good. It’ll be a way for you to get it off your chest and it won’t do any good, which is number five. Lastly, the last thing we see here is, remember, you have to pray for them. You have to forgive them. You have to not avoid them. You have to give them what they need, doing good but giving them what they need. And lastly, you have to do it humbly, verse 16, “Do not be proud, do not be conceited.” In Prov 25 is a verse that says, “A gentle word can break a bone.” Prov 15:1 says, “A soft answer turns away wrath.” If you go to somebody, to talk to them about what they’ve done to you, if you go in a hottie way, if you go in a proud way, if you’re going to wait to tell them what’s wrong, so kind of get it off your chest, which means you’re doing it for your sake, not their sake, not for truth sake, not for the world’s sake. You know, for your sake; you’re just going to make the perpetrator worse. But if you have the humility and the love and you’ve forgiven them enough that they sit and they listen to you criticizing them, and yet they say, “You know, I don’t like what you’re saying, and I’m not even sure I agree with it, but I can see that you care for me.” Now you’re doing what it says. And you’ve got a 50–50 chance of maybe actually helping them but if you don’t do all this stuff, evil has one. If instead you very loudly tell people off and nurse a grudge and run people down, evil has one. It’s one in your life and it’s, you are now a vehicle for evil in the world.
Congratulations. Well, where are we going to get the power to do this? I mean, every time I’ve ever read this passage and some of you’ve been around when I’ve preached on it before, you do get to the end and you say, “I’ve got absolutely, there’s no way I can refute this.” This is absolutely true. But my goodness, this is a must incredibly hard thing I’ve ever heard. And it’s something that very few people do this, overcoming evil with good and something I struggle with enormously, and I have hardly ever done it myself. Where do you get the power to do this? Where do you get the power to have a life this patient, this forgiving and actually this brave? Well, let’s go back. I have to go back to the well twice this time. And let’s go back to verse 19. Do not take revenge. Okay. What’s the secret of not taking revenge? What’s the secret of overcoming evil with good? Leave room for God’s wrath.
See, this is actually even more direct now. Here’s what it’s saying, Get out of God’s chair. I was trying to tell you that worry and anxiety and impatience and grumbling in general comes from sitting in God’s chair and sort of knowing, like, “I’m the judge of all the earth, and I know how the world ought to go.” But in particular, if you’re having trouble overcoming evil with good is because you are definitely sitting in God’s chair. You think you know what this person deserves, and you were meeting out judgment. Get out of the chair, how? I suggest two ways. Number one way, look at yourself. It’s not the most effective way, but let’s just take, you know, sixty seconds on it, look at yourself.
You are totally unqualified for this job. First of all, you have no idea, you don’t have the knowledge to know what these people deserve, the people you’re mad at, the people you’re hoping this and that’ll happen. You don’t have the knowledge to know what they deserve? You don’t know what they’ve gone through, you don’t know what’s in their heart. You don’t know how their parents treated them, you don’t know. So, you don’t know enough to know what they deserve. But then secondly, you don’t have the right to give them what you deserve. They deserve because you deserve judgment, every single one of us. Have you ever gotten away with anything that you didn’t ever really get caught, and punished for? Yes, of course, being, don’t say that God called down judgment on this person because but not over here, because if you, because you know that you couldn’t bear that, you don’t have the knowledge to be judged. You don’t have the right to be the judge. So get out of the chair. One way to get out of the chair and start to be able to forgive is to say, look at yourself, but actually that’s not the main way.
You need to look at Jesus. And you need to look at Jesus Christ, the incarnate Son of God who didn’t go to that chair himself. Look, the only human being in the history of the world that had the knowledge to sit in that chair and judge people and condemn them was Jesus. He had the knowledge to do it because He knew what was in people’s hearts. Lots of places in the gospels tell us about that. But He also had the right because He was perfect. But even Jesus Christ, when He came into this world did not go to that chair. Why? John 12:47, He says, “I did not come to the world to judge the world but to save it.” And my friends, if Jesus Christ didn’t sit in that chair, how dare you or I? If Jesus Christ said, “I didn’t come in the world to judge it,” and tell people that what these are, I came to save, I came to forgive, I came to pardon, I came to redeem, then you should be doing the same thing. How dare you and I get in that chair? But don’t just look at what Jesus didn’t do for a second. Look at what He did.
Look at His patience. You know, Isa 53 says, “He didn’t open his mouth. He was like the lamb who was silent before his shearer’s. Even under all of his sufferings He never opened His mouth. You know, Matt 12 says, “He did not cry or quarrel in the street, but he was quiet.” Quiet. Why? Because He was patient taking what, things like this. They stripped Him and put a scarlet robe on Him. And then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on His head. They put a staff in His right hand, they knelt in front of Him, and they mocked him, “Hail! King of the Jews.” They said, they spit on Him. They took the staff and struck Him on the head again and again. He didn’t open His mouth, why? He was patient, under suffering, under reflection. Why? For us, for us! See, if you look at Jesus Christ being patient, trusting God, not complaining, never grumbling under reflection, just as an example, I don’t think that’s going to change you because it will be crushing. You say, “I’m not Jesus, I can’t do that.” But if you look at Him, if you look at Him saving you through His patience, His patience is what saved you. Remember last week, if you were here, here’s what we said. No one learns to love by trying, they learn to love by experiencing love. Babies learn to love because someone picks them up and holds them and loves them. And if nobody does that they die. Our hope with all kinds of attachment problems. Before love is something you do, it’s someone you meet. You’ll only love like you’ve been loved and you’ll only be patient if you see someone saving you through the most costly patience possible. And forgiving you even as He dies, “Father, forgive them for they don’t know what they’re doing.” And that is what changes you. [inaudible] puts it like this. He’s exactly right. Forgiveness, flounders. When I exclude the enemy from the community of humans, even as I exclude myself in the community of sinners, got that? No one can be in the presence of the crucified Messiah for long without transposing the enemy from the sphere of monstrous inhumanity into the sphere of shared humanity, and yourself in the sphere of proud innocence into the sphere of common sinfulness. Why? When one knows that God’s love is greater than all sin, when you’ve experienced God’s love, you’re free to see that you’re a sinner. And you’re no different. And then you, the person you’re saying, they are monsters? No, they’re humans like you. And I’m a judge. No, I’m a sinner like him or her. And the gospel makes you patient. When you see that He saved you through His patience, oh, gosh! Friends, listen. On the cross Jesus Christ, through His infinite patience, redeemed you by taking the penalty we deserve for our impatience so that God will never lose patience with you. You believe in Him and He’ll never give up on you. And that’ll change you.
That’ll make you somebody who’s gracious, who’s poised, and who’s got a joy not based on circumstances that is inextinguishable. Let us pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have shown us what we have to do. Oh Lord, how would be great to have congregations of people who practice this, how we would stand out from the rest of the human race, unfortunately, but how we would stand out from our own past, because we have not lived like this, but in the infinite saving, melting, transforming loving patience of Jesus Christ, under the suffering for us. The vision of that can make us more and more like Him, so that we can also overcome evil with good as He did. So, let this be true in our lives. We pray in Jesus name, Amen.




Love, Patience, and Suffering

Scripture reading is taken from Romans 8:16–28:

  The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children. Now if we are children, then we are heirs, heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory. I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us. For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed. For the creation was subjected to frustration, not by its own choice, but by the will of the one who subjected it, and hope that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay, and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time. Not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies. For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is not hope at all, who hopes for what they already have? But if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently. In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of God. And we know that In all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to His purpose. This is the word of the Lord.


A couple of years (pardon me) a couple of weeks ago, we started a new series. And that series began with looking at 1 Cor 13, which is the famous love chapter. It’s usually read at weddings, and we said, “Sure, you can go ahead, we’ll still let you read it at weddings,” but God, when He inspired Paul to write it, Paul certainly wasn’t thinking of weddings. He was thinking about a church, the Corinthian church that was filled with gifted people, talented people that were very busy, church seemed to be growing, people were very moral, very committed, but they didn’t show much evidence of supernaturally changed hearts. They’re busy, they’re moral, but they didn’t show evidence of the Holy Spirit coming in with regenerating power and changing the basic operating principle of the human heart which is without the Spirit’s intervention, power and self-assertion, there was no evidence the Corinthians were changed into the new operating system of love and self-sacrifice. The way our hearts normally operated on the basis of power and self assertion, Paul says when the Spirit is regenerated in us, we operate in a whole new system, you might say a new operating system of love and self-sacrifice, but the Corinthians, they were moral and committed and busy in the church, but were grumpy and impatient and irritable and resentful and turf conscious and jealous, showed none of those evidences of a supernaturally change heart.
What we’re doing each week now is not staying in 1 Cor 13 but going to other passages in Paul’s letters to look at what those marks of a changed heart are, and today we’re going to look at one of the most important ones in the early stages of the Christian church, when the Greeks and the Romans looked at this new religion that was growing, and they met these Christians for the first time, one of the first things that surprised them, that characterized Christians, and made them look different from the people around them was how they handled suffering, how they understood it, and how they handled it. And as I’m going to show you what they realized was that in the East and in the West, people’s different views of suffering were very different in the way the Christians were handling. In other words, Christianity brought into the world a view and a way to handle suffering that the world has never seen before.
So, let’s just take a look at this. This passage, Rom 8 is a very famous passage, and it actually is looking at all the benefits of salvation but one of the things I think, is usually overlooked when Rom 8 is studied is the prominence of suffering in Rom 8, and I would just like to draw out what this text tells us about suffering. And it’s going to show us first of all, the unique Christian view of suffering, then secondly, the unique resources we get to face suffering. Then finally, how we can make those resources our own. So, you start with how do the unique Christian way of understanding and viewing suffering, and then the practical resources for facing it. And finally, how we can make our own. Now, the view, let’s just take a look at verses 22 and 21 in that order. 22 says, we know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
Now the word groaning is a real strong word. It’s a Greek word that usually means the cry of someone facing death. I know that the word is often used in Greek literature. To talk about the groans of the men who are on the battlefield dying. I’ve talked to people who have been in war. And say, one of the most awful things about war is actually when the battle is over and you’ve come off the field and you can hear the groans of the soldiers are still out there on the ground dying and they’re dying in agony. And that’s the word groan, the cry of someone facing death. It’s a little bit masked in a way, because we tend to read everything through our own cultural and historical filter. And when it says, we know the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth, you look at that, and you say, “Oh, well, childbirth, yeah, obviously there’s pain, but then there’s the baby.” That’s positive, right? Well, we’re forgetting, in those days, any woman in labor was facing death. You forget that.
Not only was labor arguably more painful than but that any woman who was going into labor was was facing death. And so, here’s Paul saying, not just that we are groaning, not just that human beings groan, but it says, we know that the whole creation has been groaning, well, obviously we’re part of creation, so we’re groaning too, but it’s intriguing what Paul is saying. He’s saying nature, the world is groaning. Because in verse 21, it’s been subjected to decay. But verse 21, also says that someday creation will be liberated from its bondage to decay, and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. Someday God is going to renew the world. Now what Paul is recapitulating in many ways is the view of the world in the book of Genesis and that’s this, that God originally did not create the world to have death in it, or suffering, or pain or agony. That wasn’t God’s original design, but the world is filled with those things because we have turned away from God.
And yet someday God is going to renew the world and put it the way it was supposed to be. Now, that immediately shows us right there the uniqueness of the Christian understanding of suffering. To show you, let’s just take three viewpoints that in one degree or another, Paul knew about. For example, the eastern view, now today, we know Buddhism. There’s an Eastern view of suffering that goes like this. It says, “Suffering is really an illusion.” The Buddhist approach would be to say, “Look, when someone dies, you feel the agony of loss, but actually, you haven’t lost anything.” Because Buddhism says, “If you were enlightened enough, you’d see that everything is one.” Everything is one, when someone dies, you just become part of the universe and everyone else in a different way. And so if you were enlightened, and you saw there were really there was no loss. No one can ever lose anything. They were all one if you are enlightened, suffering will go away. Suffering is an illusion. That’s one view. You also have in the world, karmic religions, religions that believe in karma. And I have to tell you, I’ve always admired the neatness of karma because what karma says is, you know, you’ve had a number of lives. So, if you’re suffering right now in this life, don’t tell me that this is unfair, whatever it was because you did something in a past life and you’re suffering for it now. I mean, f-neat. Think about it. It means there’s no one just suffering. Everything is working out exactly the way it’s supposed to be. It’s perfectly natural; there’s no injustice, there’s no disproportion, nothing at all.
Okay. And in Paul’s time, of course, the Greeks and the Romans, especially the philosophers, their view of suffering which Paul would have known quite a bit about, and, you know, our word Stoicism comes down from one of the Greek, one of the most influential of the ancient Greek philosophic schools, the stoics. And their understanding of suffering was this, when someone is suffering came along, you did not groan. You did not cry, you did not scream. You controlled yourself because the Greeks said, “Look, if you want to show that you have nobility and elevated thought, nobility of character and elevated thought, then you contemplate philosophically life. And you see, this is just life. Stuff happens. This is just life. And if you know that, then when bad things happen, you control yourself because you have, you’ve thought it out and you have complete controls and self-control, emotional self-control was the highest that’s shaming on our culture. The stoic culture basically said, “This suffering is an opportunity for you to show that you will not let it get to you.” You don’t cry, you don’t groan. Now, Christianity was radically different than all these views. Radically that first of all against Buddhism, Christianity says, “suffering is real,” is real.
Secondly against karma, Christianity says, it’s often unjust, often unjust, because the world’s broken, it’s not working the way it should work. Job’s friends in a way had a kind of karmic approach to it. Remember, Job’s friends in the book of Job? They come and say, “Look, if you live a good life, you’ll have a good life. If you live a bad life, you’ll have a bad life. And the whole book of Job is to say, it’s just not true because the world is broken now, things do not work the way they’re supposed to work. Things fall apart, the center cannot hold, anarchy is loosed upon the world. The world is not the way it ought to be and suffering is often just tragic and unjust. But then thirdly, Christianity says no, against the stoics, Christianity says, no, no, no, no, no. The human thing to do when you suffer is, you groan, you cry. Look at the Psalms. You lament. Christianity gave by the way that those when the Greco Roman world met Christianity, they, historians say that the stoics and the Greek philosophers gave the populace a view of suffering and Buddhism or it may say, at that time, Eastern religion, even a view of suffering that was actually pretty tough to do. It was pretty tough to say, “Don’t cry, don’t be upset, don’t complain, everything’s happening the way it ought to happen, don’t worry about it.” And that’s it. Christianity came along and said, gave people relief, and said, “No, no suffering is real and it’s tragic and it’s wrong and it’s something we ought to cry out about.” And the realism of that was pretty remarkable to people actually. And, Christian view of suffering was very, very important part of its, how it recommended itself familiar to many of the people who did not believe in it at that time.
But up to now, let’s say this, we’ve actually been abstract, okay? It’s nice to have a philosophically you know, lay out the different philosophies and here’s what, here’s the Christian view of suffering. But what we really want to know is how do you actually handle it? And so, there’s three unique resources. I don’t think there’s the only ones that Christianity gives. But there’s three unique resources that Christianity gives people who are in suffering. And they’re right in this passage, and I put it like this. They are praying to the Father, resting in the king, calculating the glory.
First, praying to the Father. Now, verse 16, famous verse, “The Spirit testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children.” And if we’re children, we’re heirs. So verse, 16 and 17. And actually, verse 14, and 15, right before it talks about the fact that when you become a Christian, God becomes your Father. And you have a relationship with Him as a Father, very famous place, just a verse or two earlier, where Paul says that the Spirit of God gives us a new relationship. When we believe in Christ, God becomes our father 


Timothy J. Keller, The Timothy Keller Sermon Archive, 2016–2017 (New York: Redeemer Presbyterian Church, 2019).


Exported from Logos Bible Study, 11:06 AM March 6, 2026.

