Love, Patience, and Suffering

Scripture reading is taken from Romans 8:16–28:

  The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children. Now if we are children, then we are heirs, heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory. I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us. For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed. For the creation was subjected to frustration, not by its own choice, but by the will of the one who subjected it, and hope that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay, and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time. Not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies. For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is not hope at all, who hopes for what they already have? But if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently. In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of God. And we know that In all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to His purpose. This is the word of the Lord.


A couple of years (pardon me) a couple of weeks ago, we started a new series. And that series began with looking at 1 Cor 13, which is the famous love chapter. It’s usually read at weddings, and we said, “Sure, you can go ahead, we’ll still let you read it at weddings,” but God, when He inspired Paul to write it, Paul certainly wasn’t thinking of weddings. He was thinking about a church, the Corinthian church that was filled with gifted people, talented people that were very busy, church seemed to be growing, people were very moral, very committed, but they didn’t show much evidence of supernaturally changed hearts. They’re busy, they’re moral, but they didn’t show evidence of the Holy Spirit coming in with regenerating power and changing the basic operating principle of the human heart which is without the Spirit’s intervention, power and self-assertion, there was no evidence the Corinthians were changed into the new operating system of love and self-sacrifice. The way our hearts normally operated on the basis of power and self assertion, Paul says when the Spirit is regenerated in us, we operate in a whole new system, you might say a new operating system of love and self-sacrifice, but the Corinthians, they were moral and committed and busy in the church, but were grumpy and impatient and irritable and resentful and turf conscious and jealous, showed none of those evidences of a supernaturally change heart.
What we’re doing each week now is not staying in 1 Cor 13 but going to other passages in Paul’s letters to look at what those marks of a changed heart are, and today we’re going to look at one of the most important ones in the early stages of the Christian church, when the Greeks and the Romans looked at this new religion that was growing, and they met these Christians for the first time, one of the first things that surprised them, that characterized Christians, and made them look different from the people around them was how they handled suffering, how they understood it, and how they handled it. And as I’m going to show you what they realized was that in the East and in the West, people’s different views of suffering were very different in the way the Christians were handling. In other words, Christianity brought into the world a view and a way to handle suffering that the world has never seen before.
So, let’s just take a look at this. This passage, Rom 8 is a very famous passage, and it actually is looking at all the benefits of salvation but one of the things I think, is usually overlooked when Rom 8 is studied is the prominence of suffering in Rom 8, and I would just like to draw out what this text tells us about suffering. And it’s going to show us first of all, the unique Christian view of suffering, then secondly, the unique resources we get to face suffering. Then finally, how we can make those resources our own. So, you start with how do the unique Christian way of understanding and viewing suffering, and then the practical resources for facing it. And finally, how we can make our own. Now, the view, let’s just take a look at verses 22 and 21 in that order. 22 says, we know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
Now the word groaning is a real strong word. It’s a Greek word that usually means the cry of someone facing death. I know that the word is often used in Greek literature. To talk about the groans of the men who are on the battlefield dying. I’ve talked to people who have been in war. And say, one of the most awful things about war is actually when the battle is over and you’ve come off the field and you can hear the groans of the soldiers are still out there on the ground dying and they’re dying in agony. And that’s the word groan, the cry of someone facing death. It’s a little bit masked in a way, because we tend to read everything through our own cultural and historical filter. And when it says, we know the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth, you look at that, and you say, “Oh, well, childbirth, yeah, obviously there’s pain, but then there’s the baby.” That’s positive, right? Well, we’re forgetting, in those days, any woman in labor was facing death. You forget that.
Not only was labor arguably more painful than but that any woman who was going into labor was was facing death. And so, here’s Paul saying, not just that we are groaning, not just that human beings groan, but it says, we know that the whole creation has been groaning, well, obviously we’re part of creation, so we’re groaning too, but it’s intriguing what Paul is saying. He’s saying nature, the world is groaning. Because in verse 21, it’s been subjected to decay. But verse 21, also says that someday creation will be liberated from its bondage to decay, and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. Someday God is going to renew the world. Now what Paul is recapitulating in many ways is the view of the world in the book of Genesis and that’s this, that God originally did not create the world to have death in it, or suffering, or pain or agony. That wasn’t God’s original design, but the world is filled with those things because we have turned away from God.
And yet someday God is going to renew the world and put it the way it was supposed to be. Now, that immediately shows us right there the uniqueness of the Christian understanding of suffering. To show you, let’s just take three viewpoints that in one degree or another, Paul knew about. For example, the eastern view, now today, we know Buddhism. There’s an Eastern view of suffering that goes like this. It says, “Suffering is really an illusion.” The Buddhist approach would be to say, “Look, when someone dies, you feel the agony of loss, but actually, you haven’t lost anything.” Because Buddhism says, “If you were enlightened enough, you’d see that everything is one.” Everything is one, when someone dies, you just become part of the universe and everyone else in a different way. And so if you were enlightened, and you saw there were really there was no loss. No one can ever lose anything. They were all one if you are enlightened, suffering will go away. Suffering is an illusion. That’s one view. You also have in the world, karmic religions, religions that believe in karma. And I have to tell you, I’ve always admired the neatness of karma because what karma says is, you know, you’ve had a number of lives. So, if you’re suffering right now in this life, don’t tell me that this is unfair, whatever it was because you did something in a past life and you’re suffering for it now. I mean, f-neat. Think about it. It means there’s no one just suffering. Everything is working out exactly the way it’s supposed to be. It’s perfectly natural; there’s no injustice, there’s no disproportion, nothing at all.
Okay. And in Paul’s time, of course, the Greeks and the Romans, especially the philosophers, their view of suffering which Paul would have known quite a bit about, and, you know, our word Stoicism comes down from one of the Greek, one of the most influential of the ancient Greek philosophic schools, the stoics. And their understanding of suffering was this, when someone is suffering came along, you did not groan. You did not cry, you did not scream. You controlled yourself because the Greeks said, “Look, if you want to show that you have nobility and elevated thought, nobility of character and elevated thought, then you contemplate philosophically life. And you see, this is just life. Stuff happens. This is just life. And if you know that, then when bad things happen, you control yourself because you have, you’ve thought it out and you have complete controls and self-control, emotional self-control was the highest that’s shaming on our culture. The stoic culture basically said, “This suffering is an opportunity for you to show that you will not let it get to you.” You don’t cry, you don’t groan. Now, Christianity was radically different than all these views. Radically that first of all against Buddhism, Christianity says, “suffering is real,” is real.
Secondly against karma, Christianity says, it’s often unjust, often unjust, because the world’s broken, it’s not working the way it should work. Job’s friends in a way had a kind of karmic approach to it. Remember, Job’s friends in the book of Job? They come and say, “Look, if you live a good life, you’ll have a good life. If you live a bad life, you’ll have a bad life. And the whole book of Job is to say, it’s just not true because the world is broken now, things do not work the way they’re supposed to work. Things fall apart, the center cannot hold, anarchy is loosed upon the world. The world is not the way it ought to be and suffering is often just tragic and unjust. But then thirdly, Christianity says no, against the stoics, Christianity says, no, no, no, no, no. The human thing to do when you suffer is, you groan, you cry. Look at the Psalms. You lament. Christianity gave by the way that those when the Greco Roman world met Christianity, they, historians say that the stoics and the Greek philosophers gave the populace a view of suffering and Buddhism or it may say, at that time, Eastern religion, even a view of suffering that was actually pretty tough to do. It was pretty tough to say, “Don’t cry, don’t be upset, don’t complain, everything’s happening the way it ought to happen, don’t worry about it.” And that’s it. Christianity came along and said, gave people relief, and said, “No, no suffering is real and it’s tragic and it’s wrong and it’s something we ought to cry out about.” And the realism of that was pretty remarkable to people actually. And, Christian view of suffering was very, very important part of its, how it recommended itself familiar to many of the people who did not believe in it at that time.
But up to now, let’s say this, we’ve actually been abstract, okay? It’s nice to have a philosophically you know, lay out the different philosophies and here’s what, here’s the Christian view of suffering. But what we really want to know is how do you actually handle it? And so, there’s three unique resources. I don’t think there’s the only ones that Christianity gives. But there’s three unique resources that Christianity gives people who are in suffering. And they’re right in this passage, and I put it like this. They are praying to the Father, resting in the king, calculating the glory.
First, praying to the Father. Now, verse 16, famous verse, “The Spirit testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children.” And if we’re children, we’re heirs. So verse, 16 and 17. And actually, verse 14, and 15, right before it talks about the fact that when you become a Christian, God becomes your Father. And you have a relationship with Him as a Father, very famous place, just a verse or two earlier, where Paul says that the Spirit of God gives us a new relationship. When we believe in Christ, God becomes our father 


Timothy J. Keller, The Timothy Keller Sermon Archive, 2016–2017 (New York: Redeemer Presbyterian Church, 2019).


Exported from Logos Bible Study, 11:06 AM March 6, 2026.