MARRIAGE IN CHRIST

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 15, 2012

Ephesians 5:21–33

  21 Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ. 22 Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord. 23 For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the Savior. 24 Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
  25 Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her 26 to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, 27 and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless. 28 In this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.
  29 After all, no one ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cares for it, just as Christ does the church—30 for we are members of his body. 31 “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” 32 This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church. 33 However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.

  This is God’s Word



This passage is like a fair number of people in New York City. It’s both rich and famous. Because it’s so rich, you could easily work through it word by word and get quite a bit out of it. But it’s also advantageous to do what we’re about to do, which is to fly over the whole thing and call out the main points by which we will get a panoramic view of the immense biblical wisdom on this subject of marriage. What we learn about marriage here is what it is, what it does, what it needs, and what it shows.


1. What marriage is

What’s the essence of marriage? What’s the definition of marriage? This is perhaps the New Testament spot in the Bible about marriage. Paul quotes the main Old Testament text on marriage, so you have it all right here. Down in verse 31, he says, “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” That’s a quote from Genesis 2:24.
When it says, “A man shall leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,” some of you recall that older English translations say, “A man will leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife.” The Hebrew word there in Genesis 2:24 is the word that basically means covenant. A covenant is a deep, exclusive, permanent, legal and personal, binding commitment. A covenant.
The essence of marriage, then, is not a declaration of present love, as important as that is. To say, “I love you” is not marriage. You can say that and not be married. Marriage is not so much a declaration of present love; it’s the binding promise of future love. It’s a promise not to feel warm and loving all the time, because nobody can promise that. It’s a promise to be loving and tender and faithful and cherishing and serving, regardless of the ups and downs of emotions or circumstances, long term, through thick and thin.
That’s the essence of marriage. It’s a covenant. It’s not the declaration of present love; it’s the promise of future love. I don’t think I have to tell you (but I will anyway) this is a complete collision with our culture, which doesn’t see the most important thing to be covenant but chemistry. For example, in 2008, there was a moviemaker, Dana Adam Shapiro … He was a single man, and he noticed a lot of his 30-something friends’ marriages were breaking up and they were getting divorces.
So he interviewed 50 couples who were breaking up, and then he did a film about it. The film was called Monogamy. A year and a half ago or so, there was an article in the New York Times magazine about it. I’m telling you about it, because his attitude was pretty typical. After doing all this study, he concluded there is an “intractable difficulty” with monogamy. What was it?
He went on to say passion and sexual chemistry need spontaneity. Marriage, by definition, is something that’s obligatory. What you do in marriage is a matter of duty because it’s obligatory. So if passion and chemistry need spontaneity and marriage is all about duty, marriage inevitably stifles it. It’s impossible to get that spontaneity, that chemistry, going, because the covenantal nature of marriage inevitably stifles it, so it’s not surprising that there’s an intractable difficulty with marriage.
Now in complete opposition to that, the great poet, W.H. Auden, said, “… any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate.” Can I repeat that with the stress on the word any? Think about this. A brilliant man, a great poet, W.H. Auden, says, “… any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate.” Why? Because, he says, marriage is “not the involuntary result of fleeting emotion but the creation of time and will.”
Why would that be? How could anybody say that any marriage (the creation of time and will), happy or unhappy, is more interesting than any romance, however passionate? Covenant is far more interesting than chemistry, in other words. How could anybody say that? Well, imagine a person with a view that chemistry is what really matters asking me a kind of combative question.
Imagine the person coming up to me and saying, “Think of the first time you kissed your future wife. Thirty-eight years later, does it have the same electrical thrill to it? Hmm?” My answer would be, “No, and I should hope not.” Here’s the reason why. That chemistry you’re talking about, that first electrical thrill, the very first time you kiss or touch somebody, is largely ego. It’s largely about you. That’s why you’re so excited. It’s not really love; it’s more ego.
What’s so thrilling and electrical about it is this person whom you think is pretty great is into you, is responding to you. So this deep need for affirmation you have, that every human being has, is getting filled. Of course that feels wonderful. I want you to know the incredible thrill of knowing this pretty great person likes you isn’t anything like the electrical thrill of actually loving the other.
See, that is all about you, but to actually love someone, to actually be so absolutely committed to somebody else’s joy and happiness and well-being that you would cut your right arm off, that you would die for that person … That’s a strong feeling. That’s passion too, and that’s not the same. You can have a so-called night of passion and not be willing to make any sacrifices at all, which shows it’s about you.
How does that other kind of passion, that other kind of thrill, develop? It takes a long time. First of all, you have to get to know who that person really is. At the very beginning, when you think you’re falling in love with someone, you’re always falling in love with your image of the person, not the real person. It takes a long time to find out who that person is, and vice versa.
Secondly, you have to make sacrifices. You have to walk through difficulties. There have to be confrontations and reconciliations. As time goes on, it shifts from the thrill of this great person liking you to your love of that person, your desire for that person, your commitment to see that person flourish and thrive, even at great cost to yourself. That’s a passion too, and that grows.
That’s a thrill too, but it’s a thrill that contrasts with that first thrill the way a river contrasts with a mud puddle. It’s covenant, not chemistry. That’s the meaning of life. Any marriage, happy or unhappy, is infinitely more interesting than any romance, however passionate. The essence of marriage is covenant. It’s not the declaration of present thrill; it’s the binding promise of future love.


2. What marriage does

What is its purpose? I’m going to try to give you two. There are way more in the passage, of course. It’s a rich and famous passage. There’s more than I can get out, but let me give you two purposes the Bible says for marriage: it cleanses and it meshes. First, it cleanses. Look at this very, very famous verse:
“Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.”
Okay, let’s ask the question … What’s Christ’s purpose when he comes into your life? What is he coming for? Well, you say, he’s coming to be adored, to be worshiped. Yeah, sure. But is that all? No. He’s coming to bring about change. He’s coming into our lives because we are spiritually twisted, blemished, and ugly, and he wants to make us spiritually brilliant and beautiful.
We’re told that’s the basis of marriage: your spouse comes into your life not to be your savior but to partner with the Savior to bring you to become the person Christ is making you to be. Again, let’s do a little contrast here. If you ask our culture now, “What’s the purpose of marriage? Why do the marriage thing?” it’s not too hard to infer.
You can tell from empirical studies and from ads for dating and relationship services. Empirical studies show increasingly young single adults say, “I want someone who will not change me.” The ads say the same thing. “I’m looking for somebody who will accept me for who I am, not try to change me.”
Okay, you’re not getting married to be changed, so why are you getting married? The only answer I can tell would be it’s to supplement me, to enhance my life. In other words, “I’m fine the way I am. I don’t want anybody to try to change me. I want companionship and romance and added income and things like that. I don’t want to be changed. Nobody should change me.”
The Bible says romance, companionship, fun, and partnership are all extremely important, but they will be enhanced if you begin with this admission: you are not fine as you are. You are flawed. You have all kinds of problems. You’re nowhere close to being the person God created you to be. When you understand that, then you begin to recognize what God says the purpose of marriage is and, therefore, what your spouse comes into your life to do.
What you want is a person who understands what God is doing in your life. If you’re a believer in Jesus, Philippians 1:6 says the good work he began in you when you believed he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ. What is that good work? You’re just a shadow of who you’re supposed to be. If you get to know somebody Jesus is changing, you see the person who’s there and you like that person, but you also see the person God is creating.
Sometimes you get glimpses of the future. You get glimpses of a wisdom, of a courage, of an insight. You get glimpses of the future glorious self Jesus Christ is creating. It’s in there, but it’s sometimes covered by all the crap. If we can, Kathy and I love to travel in the western mountainous parts of the British Isles, whether it’s Wales or England or Scotland.
Those of you who are from there or those of you who have tried to travel there know that as beautiful as the mountains are, it always rains there. If you go there for four days, you’ll be very fortunate if one day you actually can see the mountains. What happens is you look up there and it’s all cloudy and you can’t see a thing, and then one day the clouds part and there’s this breathtaking mountain. Then, of course, after a while the clouds come back and you can’t see it anymore.
That’s how all of us are, actually. Every so often the clouds part, and you can see in yourself or in your friends in whom Jesus is working the glorious, wonderful thing God is making them into, and then usually the clouds roll back in. Your flaws and bad habits and besetting sins obscure it. Here’s what we need in our lives.
First of all, we need Christian community. We need fellowship. That means you need brothers and sisters around you who not only love you for what you are, but also are particularly excited about what God is making you. Christian marriage, then, is a uniquely intense form of Christian fellowship. What you need in your life is someone who comes into your life and says, “I love you. I’m also excited about what God is making you. I see the great thing God is doing in your life, and it excites me.
I want to be a part; I want to partner with Christ in helping you grow in grace and become that, and I want you to partner with Christ in the same thing in my life, so that someday we’ll stand before the throne, and all of the bad things, all of the sins and flaws, will have fallen off, and we’ll finally be the people God actually created us to be. We’ll be absolute beauties, and we’ll look at each other and say, ‘I always knew you could be like this.’ ”
That’s the purpose of marriage. Are you getting a nosebleed yet? Okay, let’s bring it down to earth. If that’s really the purpose of marriage, to cleanse one another, to partner with the Savior in helping your spouse become the future glory self that God is making him or her … You say, “Well, that’s awfully lofty.” I’ll bring it down to earth. I’ll give you three very practical implications.
First, you get into marriage expecting confrontation. You expect to clash. You expect you’re going to be speaking the truth in love to each other. You expect you’re going to talk to each other about things that need to be changed. You’re not going to come in saying, “Oh, I don’t want anybody to change me.” You’re not going to come in and as soon as you have your first clash say, “Oh my goodness, I didn’t marry the right person.”
If you have married the right person … In fact, if you are really married, marriage is going to bring you to confront the things that are wrong with you in a way no other relationship has been able to do. It’s going to get through to you. You’re going to get out of denial about who you are. So first of all, you expect that kind of thing. You expect the give and take. You expect the clashing. You expect it to be done speaking the truth in love, but you expect it.
Years ago, somebody said to me (I’ve never forgotten it, and probably some of you have heard me say this before) marriage is like a gem tumbler. It’s two rough stones put into a tumbler. They tumble around. They knock the rough edges off each other. When they come out they’re beautiful. But how did they get beautiful? Through knocking the rough edges off each other. So first of all, you expect the clashes, and you’re not shocked by it.
Secondly, who do you choose to marry? You know what you do. People say to me, “But shouldn’t I be really deeply attracted to the person I marry?” Yeah, but I would like you to have a comprehensive attraction. Why not be attracted to something in the person that you know will be getting stronger as you get older, not weaker?
Most of us say, “I want to marry him or her because of …” What? Well, I can tell you, however you want to describe it, it will probably get weaker and weaker as you get older. It has to do with looks or something like that. Why not choose something that could get stronger? That’s comprehensive attraction. In other words, instead of choosing people on the basis of looks and money and connections and things like that, you should be saying, “I need to find somebody who can be my best friend and my most trusted counselor.”
Here’s what you’re doing. You walk into a room. You see ten people of the desired gender. You immediately rule out seven of them on the basis of the stuff that will fade as you get older. Then you go after those three, hoping maybe one of them could be a best friend and trusted counselor, but you left your best prospects back there at your first cut. Who are you choosing? Who are you looking toward to be your spouse? It should be someone who will be your very best friend, your most trusted counselor.
The third thing is when people say, “But there needs to be chemistry; there needs to be this really great attraction,” I say, “Well yeah, but I want you to know there’s nothing more attractive than to be loved by somebody you respect.” In the very beginning, it’s fairly easy to respect somebody because of résumé and the figure they cut, but 10 years later, who will you respect?
You’re going to respect somebody who knows how to make changes, somebody who’s going to be there for you, somebody who knows how to speak the truth in love, somebody who’s willing to sacrifice for you and make changes for you. That’s the kind of person you respect. There is nothing more wonderful than to be loved by somebody you respect. As J.R.R. Tolkien said, “The praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards.” Now completely rethink your marriage searching and your understanding of your marriage in light of the purpose of marriage.
The other thing marriage does is it meshes. What I’m about to do is what my wife Kathy calls “stunt preaching.” Stunt preaching is this. In the next four and a half minutes, I’m going to take you in and out of a subject that is culturally supercharged with controversy. I’m going to take you in and out to show you what the Bible says but to not allow the subject to hijack the rest of the sermon. Watch. Observe.
Here’s a second purpose of marriage: it’s to bridge the gap between the genders. Have you noticed the way the wife’s role is described and the way the husband’s role is described are not identical? They recognize differences between the genders in marriage. The Bible doesn’t just come and say the wife’s role and the husband’s role, the male’s role and the female’s role, are exactly the same. No, it doesn’t do that.
Why not? Because the Bible takes our gender differences and our gendered difference seriously. It doesn’t ignore it the way modern culture does and just assumes everybody is going to do exactly the same thing, no matter how deeply different we are. It not only takes the gender differences seriously, but it gives us a way to allow the genders to complement one another and mesh together in a marriage for the health and enrichment of the whole relationship.
Now how does the Bible do that? It does it brilliantly, because it lays down one, and actually only one, principle. This is a basic principle. It’s a far-reaching principle. It’s a controversial principle. But it’s also incredibly flexible. What is that principle? It says it’s headship. It says, “Wives, let your husbands be your head in the marriage.” What does headship mean? You may have heard all sorts of things. I probably have studied it as much as anybody here.
Not everybody is going to agree with me, but from what I can understand, whatever else the Bible means by headship, it means final say. It means leadership. It means saying, “Wives, if you want to get in touch with your own gender difference and husbands with your own gender difference, adopt this as a principle: in the end, the husband has leadership and has the final say. When you can’t agree, let him have the final say. Let him have the authority in the relationship.” That’s how you mesh. That’s how you bridge the gap.
Now as soon as you hear that principle, right away you’re already thinking, “Oh, that means, that means, that means …” No, wait. The Bible gets control of this and won’t let you just throw in your own content. It tells you two things in the text that take control of this whole idea of headship in marriage. The first thing it says is the man must never exercise headship to please himself. Look. It says, “Love your wives as Christ loved the church and sacrificed, died, for her, gave himself up for her.”
That principle, which is in verse 25, is the husband must never do anything just to please himself. It’s the husband’s job to always put the needs and desires of his wife ahead of his own. Always. Which means this. Let’s say you have to buy a car, husband and wife, and you can’t agree. The wife really wants to buy a red car, and the husband wants to buy a blue car, and you can’t agree.
Does the husband say, “Honey, remember Ephesians 5:22. I’m the head, so it’s the blue car”? No, because the wife can say, “Honey, remember Ephesians 5:25. You’re supposed to die for me. This is sort of short of that.” She’s right. The point is if you’re following Christ, as a husband, you must never use your headship to just please yourself. In fact, you should always be trying to find ways in which to put your wife’s desires and needs ahead of your own. Of course you should let her have the red car if it gives her joy. That’s your job.
You say, “Well, what’s headship about, then?” You only overrule your wife when the two of you are working on something and you can’t agree, and you believe the way she’s going wouldn’t be good for her or you or the marriage, or something like that. Somebody has to make the final call, and you make the final call. That’s when you overrule your wife: only when you think you’re doing the best thing for you both, never just to please yourself.
The second principle is there are almost no cultural details given in the Bible to this principle. The Bible says, “Wives, let your husbands be head.” Now I know a lot of guys, a lot of traditional-minded people, say, “Right. That’s right. In my family, the husband did this and this and this, and the wife did this, and that’s how it’s going to be.” The Bible doesn’t give you details. It says, “Here’s the principle. Now you work out the details.”
Why wouldn’t the Bible give you details? Why doesn’t it say who gets control of the checkbook, and what about working? Why doesn’t it say anything like that? Because the Bible is giving you a principle for all times, places, cultures, centuries. It would be stupid to give you details. Don’t you see? It’s form and yet freedom.
The Bible is saying don’t reject the principle of male headship, because that gets you in touch with your gender difference and helps you mesh, but you must agree on what that works out to be. You must agree on the details. You work it out yourselves based on your personalities, your temperaments, your time and place, your culture. You work it out.
Don’t you dare have anybody come in and say, “Well, in my family, the husband did this, the wife did this, so we’re married …” So what? It says the man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. You can’t say that. You can’t go back there. You have to work it out. Liberals don’t like the principle of male headship. Conservatives want to bring in all of their cultural details. The Bible doesn’t go either direction.


3. What marriage needs

I’ll just tell you, and then I’ll show you where the Bible says it. The Bible says if marriage is going to work, you need a Holy Spirit-powered, gospel-based ability to do love philanthropy. That’s the key to marriage. Unless you have that, marriage won’t work. That’s what you need. What?
Now notice we started the text with verse 21, which was actually covered in last week’s message. It says, “Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.” If you were here last week, you’ll know this is actually the last clause in a long sentence that stretches back to verse 18. In 5:18, Paul says, “Be filled with the Spirit.” We talked about this last week. What does it mean to be filled with the Spirit? Paul explains.
To be filled with the Spirit is actually explained by John 16, where Jesus says, “When the Holy Spirit comes, he will take what you know of me, and he will glorify me.” Paul talks about it in Ephesians 3:17. The Holy Spirit’s job, as it were, is to take the things you may know with your head … Do you know Jesus died for you? Do you know he loved you enough to die for you?
The Holy Spirit takes what Jesus did on the cross and makes it existentially alive to you. You grasp it. You grasp how wide and high and deep and long is the love of Christ, and it becomes a blazing fire in your heart. Paul goes on and says what it means to be filled with the Spirit. He describes it. First, you’re always going around singing inside. Remember? Inner music.
You’re not just thinking, “Oh, I’m a Christian.” You’re singing. You’re making melody, Paul says. You’re always amazed at his grace. Amazing grace, amazing love. The last thing he mentions is that will make it possible for you to submit to one another out of reverence for Christ. When you have this incredible inner love and joy, a sense of God’s love in your heart, it makes it easier for you to serve other people. That’s verse 21.
Then suddenly, in verse 22, he says, “Wives, submit to your husbands.” Now wait a minute. He’s talking about the fullness of the Spirit. He’s talking about having your soul sloshing with God’s existential, experiential love. Then he starts talking about marriage, wives, husbands. Why isn’t there any transition? Why doesn’t he say, “Okay, readers, I’m talking about the fullness of the Spirit, but now I’m going to talk to you about marriage”? Why is there no transition?
There’s no transition because he hasn’t changed the subject. What he’s saying is marriage will never work unless you assume this. This is the presupposition. Unless you know God’s love existentially, powerfully, in your heart of hearts, you will not actually be able to do what you should do in marriage. Why not?
Remember I mentioned love philanthropy? What do I mean by that? You know what a philanthropist is. It’s a man or woman who’s getting so much money over here that he or she can give away all kinds of money over here. Why can a philanthropist give so much money away to charity? Not investment, where you get a return, but so much money away. Why can he do that? Because he’s getting so much over here he can give so much away.
There is no way you will ever come to the place I’ve been talking about, a place that through thick and thin, through conflicts and reconciliations, through times of difficulty and sacrificial service, that initial selfish, egocentric, electrical charge turns into real deep oneness and love … You’re never going to get there unless you can love your spouse during times in which your spouse is distracted, during times in which your spouse is discouraged or sick, during times in which your spouse is not being the spouse he or she should be.
If your spouse is the main source of love and happiness in your life and you either don’t have a relationship with God or the relationship with God is not existentially real to you, it’s something you subscribe to but it’s not a real present reality in your life … If your real source of meaning and hope and love and joy is your spouse, then when your spouse stops giving you the love he or she should give you, when the spouse criticizes you or has a problem or goes through a rough patch, you’re going to melt down.
Do you know why? You can only keep giving love as long as you’re getting it. As long as you’re giving love to your spouse and your spouse is giving you love back, fine. But when you have to give love and your spouse isn’t giving you much back, you’re going to freak out. Why? You don’t have any other source. When your spouse criticizes you, if he or she is the main source of love in your life, you’re going to freak out. You’re going to melt down.
If your spouse goes through a big time in which he or she is not being the spouse he or she ought to be, you’re going to say, “Well, you’re not being the spouse you ought to be; I can’t be the spouse I ought to be,” and you’ll withdraw. You’ll break down. You might go looking for chemistry somewhere else.
But what if you love God more than your spouse? Then you’ll love your spouse well. What if you get all this love from him? Like I said, it’s just sloshing around in the center of your being. Then during those times, you’ll be able to do love philanthropy. You’ll be able to love even when you’re not getting much love back.
How will you have this incredible Holy Spirit-powered, gospel-based ability to do love philanthropy, which you desperately need if your marriage is ever going to come to a place of strength and wholeness? It comes from the gospel, the Holy Spirit making the gospel real. What is the gospel? Jesus Christ was the perfect spouse. Do you see the spousal love of Jesus?
Jesus made us. The Lord created us. Then, Genesis says, we turned away from him. We went away from him. What did Jesus do? Did he say, “Well, you’re not being the spouse you should be; I’m not going to be the spouse I should be”? No. He came to earth. He emptied himself. He went to the cross. He gave himself for us. Husbands, wives, look at how Christ loved us and gave himself for us, the ultimate spousal love.
When he was up there on the cross looking down at us being terrible spouses … killing him, betraying him, denying him, mocking him … in one of the great acts of spousal love in history, he stayed. He spoke the truth in love to us, and he didn’t leave us. Through that death came resurrection. If you know he loves you like that, if the Holy Spirit brings that home to your heart, you will have …
If you love God more than you love your spouse, you will love your spouse well, and if your spouse is the main source of love in your life, you will not love your spouse well. I want you to see when Paul says, “This is the thing you need: you need the fullness of the Spirit or you’re not going to be able to do what you’re supposed to do …” I don’t want you to think, by the way, that means only Christians can have good marriages, but here’s what you have to understand.
People who are not Christians who have good marriages have good marriages because, whether they know it or not, they’re walking in Jesus’ footsteps. They’re recapitulating the gospel. They’re sacrificing. It’s the self-giving love of Christ they’re actually acting out in their marriages, whether they know it or not. See, when you are acting out the gospel, you love your spouse not because he or she is lovely but to make them lovely, because that’s what Jesus did for us.


4. What marriage shows

Paul says, “This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church.” This image in the Old Testament, that God is like a husband and Israel is like his bride, and this image in the New Testament, that Christ is like our husband and we are like his bride, is not just a metaphor. According to Revelation, it points to a reality that someday, at the end of time, there will be the marriage supper of the Lamb, that Jesus Christ is going to unite with us, that we are really going to fall into his arms.
Let me say it as vividly as I can. The Bible says human marriage is, therefore, penultimate. It points to the ultimate marriage. Even the most wonderful, rapturous episode of marital love is just a dim hint of the ecstasy and cosmic joy of falling into the Lord’s arms, because that’s what you were created for. Human love is just a pointer to that. Human love is penultimate. That’s the ultimate marriage.
Unless you see what marriage shows and points to, you won’t be single well or married well. What do I mean by that? First of all, you won’t be single well. Why not? Well, there are two ways not to be single well. First is to want too much to be married, so you’re so unhappy. “Oh, my life is over because I’m not married.” The other actually is to be single and not want to be married enough, to be afraid of marriage or to hate the idea.
If you see human marriage is penultimate, you’ll be single well. Why? Because you’ll know, “Gee, I’d like to be married, but the ultimate marriage, the ultimate set of arms, the ultimate marriage feast, because I believe in Jesus Christ, awaits me. The one I really need, the one that will really satisfy me, that no human marriage can satisfy, is mine.” Only when you understand that will you not let your single state throw you.
On the other hand, if you don’t know that human marriage is penultimate, you won’t be married well either, because you will try to make your spouse or marriage itself give you what only Christ can give you, and that will crush your marriage under that expectation. Oh no. I remember years ago having a terrible day with Kathy. It was my fault. (It’s not always my fault.) I remember falling into bed, after having studied this text in the morning, and thinking, after a hard day of marriage, “This is a profound mystery.”
I was making a joke to myself, but I was wrong. What’s a profound mystery about marriage is not that it’s hard. Actually, it makes perfect sense. Is your relationship with God hard? Yes. Is it glorious? Yes. Is it the most rewarding possible thing? Yes. It shouldn’t surprise us that marriage is too. This is the profound mystery: marriage helps us understand what the gospel is about, and the gospel gives us the power to be either married or unmarried very well. Think on that. Let us pray.

Our Father, we thank you that you’ve just flown us over this panorama and shown us the immense biblical wisdom of marriage. There has probably never been a culture, place, or time that most needed this, though we’ve always needed it. I pray that you would help us, every person hearing this, to order our lives in accord with it. O Lord, most of all, let your Holy Spirit apply this teaching to every person in this room’s life where they need it, and we ask that you would grant this, because we ask for it through Jesus. In his name we pray, amen.