INTO JERUSALEM

Savior and Teacher—A Study of Matthew—March 8, 2012

Matthew 21:1–14

  1 As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, 2 saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt beside her. Untie them and bring them to me. 3 If anyone says anything to you, tell him that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
  4 This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet: 5 “Say to Daughter of Zion, ‘See, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’ ” 6 The disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them. 7 They brought the donkey and the colt, placed their cloaks on them, and Jesus sat on them.
  8 A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. 9 The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” 10 When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?”
  11 The crowds answered, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.” 12 Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves. 13“It is written,” he said to them, “ ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’ ” 14 The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.

  This is the Word of the Lord



Well, in the weeks leading up to Easter, what we are doing is we’re looking at the whole life of Jesus by looking at the main episodes in his life and we’re doing that in the gospel of Matthew. In a sense, we’re building a biography of Jesus as it were.
This very famous episode, the triumphal entry to Jerusalem, also called Palm Sunday (even though Matthew doesn’t mention that the branches that they were waving and putting on the ground for him were palms; it’s John that tells us that) … Even a casual reading of the passage reveals that Jesus is very carefully choosing exactly how it happens.
He’s actually orchestrating it in many ways because it’s deeply symbolic. It’s deeply symbolic because he wants to teach us something about who he is and what he came to do. What do we learn from this famous event? We learn three things. He’s riding in to the cheers of the crowd. He’s a king, but we’ll especially learn he’s the confrontational king. He’s a counter-intuitive king. He’s the coming king. We learn from the passage something about each one of those aspects of who he is.


1. He’s the confrontational king

Let me show you how confrontational he is. If you were reading the Gospels all the way through, you would notice up to now (this is certainly very, very clear in Matthew, Mark, and Luke) that when Jesus does a healing or casts out a demon or does a miracle, he always says to people, “Don’t tell anybody.” In other words, he’s constantly tamping down on people’s public proclamation of what they think about his identity.
He doesn’t want them to proclaim, “Oh, he’s this. Oh, he’s that.” He doesn’t want that. He’s constantly telling people, “Don’t say anything.” The reason is that the more the people make these great claims about who he is, the greater the claims, the more pressure that puts on the religious and civic leaders to stop him. Jesus knew that.
The more the claims got very high, the more it was pushing the religious and civic leaders to imprison him or kill him and that would be the end of his ministry. Jesus wasn’t ready to have his ministry ended; he had things to do and say. But now it changes and do you know why it changes? It’s amazing.
The blind men, the animal, the crowd, the temple … Look, first of all, at the blind men. In 20 of Matthew, right before this happens, Jesus is walking with crowds toward Jerusalem. It’s Passover so there are great crowds of people on the roads on the way in to Jerusalem. At one point, two blind men say to him, “Son of David, have mercy on us!”
Now Son of David is a messianic address. Son of David was the way they talked about the Messiah, the true Messiah, the one that they’d been waiting for for centuries, the one who was going to release and rescue Israel of all of its problems, liberate Israel. That’s what the Son of David meant.
So here, in front of a crowd, two blind men say, “Son of David, have mercy on us!” Jesus says, “What do you want me to do for you?” and then he heals them. Can you imagine how the disciples felt because they’d been watching Jesus constantly, keeping things secret? Here are two guys that say, “Oh, true, ultimate King Messiah,” and Jesus says, “Yes,” right in front of everybody and then he heals them.
That’s not all. Can you imagine the buzz? Can you imagine the excitement in the crowd? Jesus brought that about. Now Jesus decides, as you can see in the beginning of this passage, not to just walk in, but to ride in. Everybody else will be walking in; he’ll be riding. He chooses these two animals and he rides on one and he rides in.
In the gospel of John 12 (you almost have to read Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John together about the triumphal entry to get a full picture of what happened) crowds start coming out from Jerusalem to be part of the excitement of the crowds coming in to Jerusalem, and we see here what they begin to cheer.
They say, “Hosanna!” Now hosanna does not mean hooray for you. Hosanna doesn’t mean hooray; it means saves us. “Hosanna, Son of David!” Then they quote Psalm 118, which is a messianic psalm. So here you have (not in some backwater place, but the capital city) people ringing their praises of the messianic king. The crowd is shouting out, “Here he is!” as they go into the capital city.
Obviously, the cleansing of the temple, where Jesus goes to the temple and casts out the money changers because commerce had taken the place of worship in the precincts of the temple, is worth a sermon all by itself. It’s worth a lot of treatment. I put it in here just to show what’s going on. When Jesus shows up at the temple and he says, “My house shouldn’t be like this …” My house?
The only person who has the right to walk into a house and start rearranging the furniture is the owner. So here is what we have. Jesus Christ, after the cloak of secrecy for all this time, suddenly is publicly declaring himself to be the messianic king. He’s confronting the city and he’s confronting, in particular, the leaders. With that, he’s forcing the issue and he’s saying, “Crown me or kill me,” because essentially he’s pushed them to the place where they have to crown him or kill him.
They have to accept it and give him everything or they have to destroy him. That’s the first point. Do you see how confrontational he is? I’d like you to consider what this means for you. The fact is that you can’t read about Jesus in the Gospels without, in a certain sense, him saying that to you.
Reflect on this fact: Jesus is the only person I’ve ever seen or ever heard of or ever known who was unbelievably humble and not at all modest. Do you know of anybody like that? I don’t. Absolutely, incredibly humble, but not modest. What do I mean? Well, look at his life. Just read about it.
Look at his humility, how tender he is, how sweet he is, how gentle he is with women, with children, with the poor, with prostitutes, with people of other races and other nations, incredibly humble, gentle, sweet, tender, but absolutely not modest at all. He’s always saying things like, “Before Abraham was, I existed. I’m going to come back to judge the whole world. I am the power behind the whole universe. I was there when Satan fell from heaven.”
Now look, everybody I know who is humble is also modest and anybody I know who is very immodest and says incredible things like that is not humble and gentle with people and people of other races. Jesus Christ was unbelievably humble and absolutely immodest and that pushes things. Do you know why? It pushes things.
Reynolds Price, Duke University professor of English for many years who passed away recently, wrote this essay about the gospel of John and he was talking about the gospel writer John and the story of Jesus in the book of John. I’m reading this because it could be just as true of Matthew and the book of Matthew. Listen to what he says.
He says (I’m paraphrasing), “If two thousand years of pious handling had not dimmed our understanding of this story’s demand, his gospel would still been seen as the burning outrage it really continues to be. It is either a work of madness or of blinding revelation. The acts it portrays, the claims it advances, from the very first paragraph, demand that we make a hard choice. If we take the Gospel writer seriously, we must finally ask the question he thrusts so flagrantly toward us. Does he bring us a life transforming truth or is this one gifted lunatic’s tale of another lunatic wilder than he?”
You know, he might have been a fraud or might have been a lunatic. Maybe? No, because you can’t be humble and immodest at the same time. What Jesus Christ is doing here is he’s pushing the envelope. What he’s saying is, “Crown me or kill me.” In other words, “You can give me everything and make me your lord or you can run away from me and even try to kill me. All right. At least in both cases you’re listening to me, but I will not be liked. I don’t want anybody to like me. I want you to worship me and obey me or else I want you to flee from me, but I will not be liked.”
“Only two thousand years of pious handling,” to use Reynolds Price’s idea, puts us in a position where we don’t see what this really is claiming. Years ago, when I was a new Christian, I heard what back then was called a lordship talk by a woman who was a Bible teacher. It just had such an impact on me (and there were a number of illustrations which I’ve used over the years and you’ve heard them) but here’s the one I want to use now.
This woman Bible teacher was talking to us about lordship and here’s how she put it. She said something like, “My name is Barbara Boyd. If you say, ‘Come in, Barbara, but stay out Boyd,’ that’s very difficult for me because I don’t have a Barbara part or a Boyd part or like I can put the Barbara part in that door. I’m all Barbara and all Boyd so you either get all of me or none of me.”
Then she said, “You can’t say, ‘Come in Savior; stay out Lord.’ You can’t say, ‘Come in Helper; stay out King.’ ” It’s all of her or nothing. You have to give him everything; you have to make him the very center of your life. There can’t be any part of your life that you don’t let him have authority over and there can’t be any part of his word that you decide I’ll obey that but not that.
You can’t just say, “Come in Savior; stay out King. Come in Jesus; stay out Christ.” You get him all, or you get nothing. That’s what he’s telling you right here on Palm Sunday in this triumphal entry and that’s what anybody who reads the Bible will see. He’s the confrontational king.


2. He’s the counter-intuitive king

Well, where do I get that? It’s what he rode in on. Stanely Hauerwas, another Duke University writer (I’m not from Duke, I just happen to have two really great quotes from people from Duke) wrote a commentary on the book of Matthew and he has a take on triumphal entry which is seldom seen.
He thinks that Jesus Christ is deliberately giving us a satire of triumphal entries. What he basically says is, “On the one hand this looks like all other triumphal entries, does it not?” Two hundred years earlier, Simon Maccabee had defeated foreign armies and kept Israel independent. He rode in (this is just 200 years earlier) to Jerusalem with people shouting cheers and waving palm branches because he delivered them.
So on the one hand, this looks just like a triumphal entry, just the way you bring in a conquering king or a conquering hero. Hauerwas says, “Yet the triumphal entry is an entry that parodies the entry of kings and armies.” This is what he points out: “Victors in battle do not ride into their capital cities riding on asses but on fiercesome horses; this king does not and will not triumph through force of arms.”
You notice Jesus Christ deliberately chose a baby donkey to ride in on which is almost comical. I mean, you know, the Men of La Mancha rode on a horse. Sancho Panza rode on a little donkey. Here’s Jesus Christ being proclaimed as king riding in on this tiny little baby animal. Why? It’s very deliberate; it’s very clear. There’s a big deal made about it; it fulfills Scripture. Why? Why would this great messiah, this great king come in gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, on the foal of a donkey. Why would he do that?
The answer is he’s telling us something about himself, but he’s also telling us something about us. I think the thing he’s telling us about himself, you probably can intuit. I’m not sure … I think it’s easier to miss the point about us. The thing he’s telling us about himself is he’s coming in to rule and he’s coming in to save.
“Hosanna!” The word hosanna means to save, right? He’s coming in to rule and he’s coming in to save not by taking power and killing, but by losing power and dying. He’s going to die on the cross for our sins. In other words, he says, “I’m going to triumph through weakness and therefore my followers can only connect with my salvation by repenting and admitting their need.
First of all he’s telling us something about the very topsy-turvy understanding of salvation. We’re not saved by our good works, and therefore we’re not saved by a strong Savior, in a sense. Jesus Christ had not come in to say, “Look at how I’m living. Look at my power. Look at how moral and great I am. Now if you live like me, you can get to heaven.” A lot of people think that’s what he’s saying, but he’s not.
That would be salvation by strength and it would only be salvation for the strong which, by the way, isn’t very democratic, because a lot of people aren’t. Instead, it’s salvation through weakness. It’s salvation by giving up and dying on the cross so that people can have a free grace salvation. In spite of all of our flaws we can just be saved and pardoned in spite of our sins. That is utterly democratic, as it were.
Salvation through weakness for people who admit they’re weak means that anybody can come and anybody can get it. Do you see how counter-intuitive it is? But I think that that point, even though you might say, “Well, that’s great,” is not too hard to intuit as I said. I think it’s easier to miss the point he’s making about us. What is that? What are the expectations of this crowd?
Let me make my point starting with when we go to God, we go to him because we need something. Almost everybody I know heads out toward God because we have a problem, we have a need; we need something. You all remember 9/11, if you were here in the city, that every church was doubled and tripled in their attendance for several weeks afterwards. I talked to people. Why? They were scared; they were threatened. They were alone, so they showed up.
As a slightly less warranted and more comical example, I had a friend of mine who was a pastor in our town where we lived for a while in the Philadelphia area. Even though he was a pastor of a church, he was a chaplain on call at the local hospital. One night, he was called to go (in the middle of the night practically) to a man who needed to talk to a pastor.
When he got there, the man just apologized and said, “I’m so sorry. They actually got the x-rays mixed up. I really don’t have cancer, so I really don’t need to talk to a pastor.” He really missed his chance because all he needed to say was, “Really? I’ve never talked to anybody who’s never going to die. You’re a very interesting person, fascinating. You don’t need a pastor. Okay, tell me, what is it like to live forever?” But he didn’t because he’s a pastor and we’re nice people. So he left, ironically, and went home.
In other words, our problem is we go to God and we say to God, “You need to give me exactly what I think I need from you, what I think I need from you.” Now what did these people think they needed? They thought they needed someone to bring judgment down on the people who were ruining the world. “The Romans, they’re ruining the world. They’ve oppressed us all.”
They thought they needed from God someone to bring judgment down on the people who were ruining the world. What they actually needed was someone to come and bear the judgment for them because they were the people who were ruining the world because everybody in the human race is part of that. What they really needed was pardon for sins.
What they really needed was something to reconcile them to God, someone to bear the punishment they deserved so that someday God could come back to earth and end all evil without ending you and me. So there is what they wanted, what they thought they needed, and what Jesus actually gave them. There were the expectations and that’s why they were saying, “Hooray! Hooray! Hooray! You’re coming and giving us what think we need.”
Of course, Jesus wasn’t bringing that at all. Here are two implications of that. First, there’s never been a better example of the absolute worthlessness of human celebrity than Palm Sunday. As you know, the crowds were coming out from Jerusalem and the crowds were coming in. They’re shouting, “Hosanna! This is the King!” The city was only so big (Jerusalem was not enormous by our standards) therefore, statistically and almost certainly some of the people shouting, “Hosanna!” on this day were shouting, “Crucify him!” a few days later.
There’s never ever been a more vivid portrait of the fickleness of corporate human nature and of the worthlessness of human celebrity. You want approval, you want celebrity, and you want the regard of the world? Sure you might get it; you might be one of the lucky ones that get it, but you’ll be on the trash heap soon. How different is God’s regard?
How much more important is the praise of God than the praise of men? Here are a few verses … Jesus says, “Him who comes to me I will in no wise cast out.” (John 6:37) “My sheep hear my voice; I know them. They follow me. I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can every pluck them out of my hand.” (John 10:27, 28)
“I am persuaded that the good work God began in you, he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ.” (Philippians 1:6) “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor anything in all creation can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Romans 8:38, 39)
“I will never, never, never, never, never forsake you.” (Hebrews 13:5) Five nevers: “… I will never, never, never, never, never forsake you.” Psalm 27:10, “Though my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will receive me.” Or what about something that’s often repeated in the book of Psalms, “His steadfast love endures forever.” When Jesus Christ loves you, when Jesus Christ puts his love … “Those whom he loves, he loves to the end.” (John 13:2) “Those whom he loves, he loves to the end.” Those whom the world loves, it loves until Saturday. That’s about it.
On the one hand, don’t mistake human approval, popularity, and acclaim for … Human celebrity is nothing. Here is the other thing. I read one commentator who rightly said that Palm Sunday, the story of the triumphal entry, is an incredible parable of the lifelong mismatch between what you want from God and what God is providing.
It is a lifelong mismatch between what our expectations are and what God actually provides, what we think we need and what God says we need. What we think we need is almost always shallow and God gives us … what? He exceeds our expectations in the end, but in the short run it can be very confusing. I mean when these folks came in and said, “Oh, you’re going to give us what we want. We need all this liberation.” A few days later, he’s dead. “Well, he failed.” No he didn’t.
Therefore, would you please keep in mind that when you come to him, virtually always, he going to give you what you really need not what you think you need. He’s going to confound your expectations, but he’s going to exceed them. To put this in a nutshell, God always gives you what you would have asked for if you knew everything he knows.
I’ll tell you, brothers and sisters, friends and neighbors (friends, Romans, and countrymen …), if you learn this you’ll live a pretty contented, non-anxious life. If you don’t learn that, you won’t. For some of you, you have to learn that even to be saved. Why? Because almost always at first we go to him thinking we need liberation from this or that.
“I have my felt needs. I have problems here and you need to help me.” And Jesus always says, “I’m going for the root of things which is you need to be reconciled to God. You need to have your sins dealt with and you need to have a relationship with God through me.”


3. He’s the coming king

Over the years, especially in churches that use lectionaries, where they give you an Old Testament reading, a psalm, a New Testament epistle, a Gospel reading every week of the year, it is surprising how often (and they’re right when they do this) on the triumphal entry day, Palm Sunday, they give you readings that have to do with the second coming of Christ.
Because on the one hand, the people thought Jesus Christ was coming to Jerusalem on that day to put everything right, to put down all injustice, all suffering, and everything. They thought it was going to bring everything right and he wasn’t. He was coming to put you right with God. It’s a picture in two little ways, there’s two ways in which this fascinating event depicts that future coming when he returns and he does put everything right.
One of them has to do with the branches and the palm trees. You know, when they say, “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord,” the blessedness that they’re asking from the Messiah is the same thing as shalom. The word blessedness and shalom are the same basic words. Shalom means complete thriving and flourishing.
When they’re calling out to the Messiah, what they’re really calling out for is, “Put absolutely everything right.” When they wave the palm branches, do you know what that means? It’s looking forward to the day in which the palm trees wave their own branches because it says in Psalm 96:12, “Then the trees of the wood will sing for joy before the Lord, for he comes to rule the earth.”
Isaiah 55:12 says, “… the mountains and hills will burst into song before you, and all the trees of the field will clap their hands.” You say, “Oh, that’s metaphorical.” Maybe, yeah, but what it’s trying to say is when the true king comes back and puts everything right, everything in nature will work again. There will be complete harmony, complete peace.
It’s the end of death, disintegration, and decay; it’s the end of sickness. It’s the end of everything that’s wrong with the material world. Someday, maybe, the trees themselves will literally dance and sing. You know, they’re just shadows of what they’re going to be under Jesus. The trees … But that’s not all. I have a friend, Don Carson, who wrote a commentary on the book of Matthew. He’s the only person who mentions this in the commentaries, but I like it so I’m going to tell you.
I’m paraphrasing, but he says, “One of the things that is so strange is everybody who knows anything about animals (horses, mules, donkeys) knows that you can’t just jump on one of them and expect to ride it. They have to be broken.” You can’t just jump on a steed and just take off. It is scared, especially a baby donkey, and especially one that you’re riding through a yelling crowd. Humanly speaking, no rider could just jump on an animal and then just have it ride very calmly through a huge crowd. This is what Don Carson says about that quote.
In the midst of this excited crowd, an unbroken, young animal remains totally calm under the hands of the Messiah who controls nature and stills the storm. Therefore this event points to the peace of the consummated kingdom. What is he saying? Jesus didn’t have to break the animal. He’s Lord of nature; he’s the Lord of all and under his hand, nothing but harmony and peace comes about. The animal knows and loves its true master for who he is.
This is a foreshadowing then of the complete healing of all nature under the future kingship of Christ. As it is written in Isaiah 11:6 and 9, “The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, and the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.”
What I love about Palm Sunday, about the triumphal entry, is on the one hand it’s telling everybody, “Listen, the number one thing you need is to get a personal relationship with God through Jesus Christ and have your sins dealt with and be reconciled to him. So have faith in him.” That’s the first thing you need.
Secondly, it’s saying to Christians that God does care about this world. Jesus Christ comes in, not looking for power, but to serve. Jesus Christ is looking forward to the time in which the problems around us will be gone (the sickness, old age, poverty, oppression) so let’s do what we can now to show that Jesus hates those things too.
Let’s tell our neighbors, “Have faith in him.” Then let’s work with our neighbors and deal with their needs whether they believe like we do or not. Then you truly will be following the Lord who rode in on that little baby donkey and really did save us. Let’s pray.

Our Father, we thank you for the richness of Scripture, first of all. We thank you for the richness of your salvation; it’s not one-dimensional. We thank you for the ways in which you confront us every time and comfort us at the same time. What comfort this is! What comfort, that your regard and your applause never ends, though the world’s does.

What comfort that you always give us what we would have asked for if we knew everything you know. What comfort and yet what confrontation. We can’t just use Jesus; we can’t just have Jesus in our life in some peripheral way. He has to be the center of everything or not there really at all. Father, thank you that you always comfort us more than you confront us.

You promise us rewards, blessings, and benefits that just completely swamp the cost and yet the cost is great. We pray that you would help us follow the One who rode in gentle … gentle to give his life for us. Remake us into the image of the One who came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for us all. We pray it in Jesus’ name, amen.


Timothy J. Keller, The Timothy Keller Sermon Archive, 2012-2013 (New York: Redeemer Presbyterian Church, 2013).


Exported from Logos Bible Study, 11:22 AM March 6, 2026.