Love, the Most Excellent Way

This morning Scripture reading comes from 1 Corinthians 13:1–13.

  If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal. If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing. Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away. For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears. When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put the ways of childhood behind me. For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known. And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. This is the word of the Lord.


When you hear that passage read, you look around for the people in the tuxes and the long dresses because, maybe right, and many of you have heard this but only ever in a wedding, maybe even have heard someone teach on this, but probably only at a wedding. And there’s nothing wrong with that. Not that there’s anything wrong with that because it’s fine to apply this to marriage. But I want you to know, it has nothing to do with what Paul had in his mind when he wrote this. In fact, the wonderful elevated verses 4–7, “Love is patient, love is kind,” is basically when Paul wrote it, it was at least partly ironic, because if you read the rest of the letter to this Corinthian church, you’ll know that they were not patient. They were not kind, they were not humble in any way. And what Paul’s doing when he makes that list is, he’s actually criticizing them. He’s coming after them. He’s admonishing them. He’s, trying to convict them. Why? Because for all of their gifts, for all of their activity, for even for all their morality, they didn’t have the marks of a supernaturally changed heart. This text is not about marriage, though it can be applied to marriage, of course. It’s about how you get and what is a supernatural changed heart.
See, most of us know a lot about how to restrain a life. We started to get in trouble because of something we’re doing and we get scared and in a sweat with our minds filled with the consequences of what might happen, we change we say, Oh, we’ve changed, but those consequences go away. And so often we snap back the way we were. Human nature without supernatural intervention is like a rubber ball that you can squish down smaller, but the minute you take the pressure off, it snaps right back because it was constrained. The rubber ball was constrained and restrained. It wasn’t actually changed. It wasn’t reshaped. And this is all about that. This text is about how easy it is to miss and not have a supernaturally changed heart. And you say, “Well, this is very different.” We’ve been talking about the rise campaign. This is that this is a new series. Well, it’s a new series Yes. But it’s not that different. Here’s the reason why. This is a whole series on what is a supernaturally changed heart and but this is the reason why we’re bringing it up right now.
We’ve been talking about how, what we think God is calling us to do in the city over the next decade. We want to see the body of Christ exponentially grow and we have said that we believe that will serve the city in so many ways. We can foresee more humane workplaces and we can see art with more hope in it and we can see people not using their money selfishly and the poor are lifted up. But none of that’s going to happen if our numbers grow, and our lives don’t actually change, if you have growth in numbers, but you don’t have supernatural change, then none of that’s going to happen. And that’s why we’re looking at this now. So, what is the supernaturally changed heart? The only way to find out when anything is, sometimes to contrast it with what isn’t it or what it isn’t. So, let’s take a look at what Paul does in the first few verses he shows us what a supernaturally changed heart is in two things that it is not and mustn’t be confused with.
And then secondly, we’ll see what it is. So, verses 1–3. Two things that supernaturally charged heart is not and then verses 4–8, what it is. Now, the first thing that it’s not, and it mustn’t be confused with is, a supernaturally changed heart is not the same as talented, successful ministry. It’s not the same as talented, successful ministry. Look at verse 2. This is a list of spiritual, you might say, gifts or talents. It says, “If I have the gift of prophecy, can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, if I have faith that can move mountains.” Now, that’s just a list of, you know, it’s an illustrative list. But if you look at chapter 12, you’ll see that the Corinthian church was filled with people that were incredibly gifted and talented. Corinth was an urban center; it was a financial center. And through history, urban centers, big cities, financial centers, cultural centers have attracted very ambitious and talented people. And very often in cities, you have some of the most talented, ambitious people there are, and they weren’t in Corinth and they came into the church.
The gift of prophecy was the miraculous ability to get revelation from God and there’s a lot of debate about what does that mean and what is that happening today? Well, Paul’s not talking about that here. He talks about it elsewhere. And so we’re not going to talk about that right here. It’s just one of the gifts. Then secondly, can fathom all mysteries and knowledge. Now, that’s Pauline language for being a teacher to fathom the mysteries. And knowledge means to master the Scripture and to teach it. And then it says, If I have faith that can move mountains. Now, that’s not just the ordinary faith that you need in order to be saved. That’s visionary faith. It’s inspirational faith. It’s the kind of faith that inspires groups of people. It’s a leadership gift. And so what Paul’s doing here is and you can see more of these things. If you go through the rest of the book of Corinthians, he’s making a list of all the talents and the gifts that the Corinthian church had. They were so successful, they were so productive. They were so gifted, they were so talented.
And then Paul pivots and says, “but without love, without love,” and we’re going to get to that as we get on, but, without a supernaturally changed heart, operating on love as its operating system, it’s worthless. It’s all worthless. He’s saying it’s possible to incredibly good at, gifted at, successful at ministry with all your gifts, and it’d be worthless. Or in another way to put it is, in the eyes of God, talent means virtually nothing compared to character. So, you know, you might say, well, how does that work? Well, it’s actually pretty important. verses 1, 2, and, 3 are things that the Corinthians have; verses 4, 5, 6, 7, are all the things that the Corinthians are not. In spite of the fact that they are talented and gifted, they are filled with what? Impatience. You still do the opposite, impatience and abrasiveness and jealousy and turf consciousness and pride and selfishness and they’re crabby. They’re gifted, they’re talented, and their churches are sure growing. I’m sure they’ve got great teachers, they’ve got great leaders, right? Faith that can move mountains, surely their church is growing. And yet Paul says, “In God’s eyes, it’s worthless.” If you don’t have a supernaturally changed heart and you can be effective in ministry, by the way, because of your talents, and not have that supernaturally changed heart.
Well, it was, we’ve to be careful here. We live in a city too, bigger than Corinth ever was. And we have some of the most talented people in the whole world here, in the world. And we all know that many of them, though they’re incredibly talented and we eat the gifts, you might say, the fruit of their talent. Yet many of them in their personal life are cruel, narcissistic, imperious and you know, we say, that just makes them colorful. What we actually do is, we excuse their lack of character because their gifts are so wonderful and we’re all eating the fruit of their gifts, maybe music or sports or in the arts or in business, we’re all eating their fruits, even though in their character, so we make excuses for their lack of character because of their gifts but that’s not what happens in the kingdom of God. It must not happen, it does not happen in the kingdom of God.
See, keep this in mind. At the very end of chapter 12, Paul says, “Seek the gifts,” which means he’s not against talent, he’s not against giftedness. I have seen churches that don’t want gifted people in them. You know why? Out of envy, okay, they don’t want them. Paul’s not like that. But here’s what he’s saying. Do not mistake talent and giftedness and brilliance and leadership and all those things. Do not mistake those things for grace. Don’t mistake gifts for grace. Don’t mistake talent for character, because he says, “I don’t care whether you’re such a good preacher, that you’re drawing multitudes, or you’re such a good leader, that millions of people are being touched by you, if you are envious, if you’re angry, if you’re anxious, if inside your heart is not been changed, then in God’s eyes, it’s valueless, it’s worthless.
Now, you know, we’re going to explain some of the reasons why, but let me just end here with a kind of warning, especially and just for a second. For those of us who are real active in this church, some of you are community group leaders, some of you are voluntary, you do a lot of work here, some of you are on the staff, you know, some of you are in ministry, you know, professional ministry, that kind of thing. This is warning particularly for you. Paul is saying, “Do not think that giftedness and grace in the heart are the same thing. God does not respect, does not value, skill and talent of the mind and the hand, as much as grace in the heart. And don’t mistake them. You say, “Well, how could you mistake them?” How can I mistake them? I’ll tell you exactly how it happens. Let’s just say you’re leading your community group and people say, “Oh, you’ve helped me so much. You know, you’ve listened to my questions, and you’ve helped me study the Bible, just helped me so much, or you’re on staff here, or you’re in ministry, and people say, “Oh, you’ve helped me so much.” And when you see that, you feel good, you should feel good. But then what you do, it’s very easy to say, “so God is with me.”
When actually you’ve got no prayer life, you’re filled with anxiety, and pride, and anger, and resentment yourself. Your heart’s nowhere, but you’ve been helping people see. And you say, “Well, I guess God’s okay with me.” Not necessarily, why? Listen. If somebody is in your path, and they need help, and God sees that you’ve got the talent to help them, why couldn’t you help them with your talent, even though your heart is not near him, even though your heart is far from him. Don’t mistake, the operation of gifts for grace. A supernaturally changed heart is not identical with talent, giftedness, and ministry. But secondly, that’s verse 2, here’s the second thing it’s not, verse 3. This actually, I think is even more, more counter-intuitive for us. Look at verse 3. What do we have there? This time, instead of three things, we have two things. “If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship, that I may boast.” Now, what’s that? Well, the first one is easy. Here’s a person who’s being so generous to the poor. They’re not just being giving, token, you know, kind of charity, but someone giving so generously to the poor, that it’s actually affecting their lifestyle. It’s possible that Paul is talking about a person who goes into voluntary poverty, who could live far higher and better, but goes into a sense of virtually voluntary poverty in order to give away so much to the poor. That’s what’s called a virtue. We call that social justice, living justly.
Now, the second one is a little harder to interpret. Some of you if you’ve been to weddings, you probably remember when they got to this verse, it said, “If I give away all that I possess to the poor and give my body to be burned, right, give my body to the flames, you’ve probably seen that translation. This one says, “body to hardship that I may boast.” As there often is questions about translation in the text here, on this going to say as far as I know, the best way to read this is just what the older way. And that is to say, it said, “If I was willing to die for my faith, I was only willing to go to the stake for my faith.” If I was willing to assert and identify myself as a Christian, even if that meant persecution.
Now, when Paul says, giveaway to the poor, doesn’t he believe we should give to the poor? Absolutely. And when Paul’s says even if I would give my, even if I would die for my faith, doesn’t Paul think we should be courageous and testify to our faith, even if it means persecution and death? Of course he does. And yet, what does he do? He says, even if I was willing to die for the faith, even if I gave away everything to the poor, and I had that kind of just living and that kind of, you know, the courage, but I have not love, it means nothing. Now, here’s what’s going on here. This is a virtue list. Aristotle talked about the virtues, his four cardinal virtues, virtues were prudence and self-control and courage and justice, and the other philosophers and classical teachers had different virtues but the virtues was basically morality. And here’s Paul saying, you can be incredibly moral, absolutely moral and still not have a supernaturally changed heart, it mean nothing. Now how in the world could that possibly be? How could it be? And the answer is actually verse 1. Now, when you read verse 1, most people look at verse 1, and they say, “Oh, this is all about tongues.” You know, if I speak in the tongues of men and angels, let me say, “What’s tongues and well,” he doesn’t explain and therefore I’m not going to explain.
But here’s what it says, “but have not love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal.” Now, why did Paul choose that symbolism? You know, a gong, a cymbal, why don’t you do that? And the answer is, as far as I can see, here’s what he’s saying. Yes, a supernaturally changed heart will always issue in a moral life, but you can have a moral life without having a supernaturally changed heart. And here’s the reason why. In Corinth, it was a religious center and there were a number of pagan cults that worshipped various gods, that had their kind of cathedrals, in the sense their temples in Corinth. So you had temples to various gods, but one of the marks of the religious rituals and the worship of those gods was the procession that every one of those temples, especially a couple of them, we know very often that what, you didn’t just go into the temple, but you came out of the temple and you marched around in a procession around the town, around the city, and everybody wore their finery. And there was always gongs and cymbals in the pagan worship. And the purpose of it was to get the attention of the god, to say to the god, “Look at how much we honor you. Listen to our prayers. See how much we venerate you.”
Now for Paul to say, you might say, I’m a Christian and I’m gifted in ministry and I’m working in a church, and I’m even willing to give away a lot of my money. And I’m willing to stand up for my faith and witness for my faith, even if it means persecution. And it all be nothing. Why? Because it’s exactly like the gong and the cymbal. Okay, let me say it again. Paul is saying you could obey the ten commandments, you could get to church every week, you could be sexually, incredibly moral, you could not just give some of your money away but huge percentages of it away to the poor, you could be true to your faith and witness to your faith to the point of persecution. And it’d be basically being done for the same reason that the pagans crying those cymbals, why it’s your way of saying to God, “Look at how good I am. Look at what I’m doing for you. Listen to me, favor me. Bless me. Answer my prayers,” that you’re actually not doing it for god, you’re doing it for yourself and you’re trying to get other people’s respect. You’re trying to get your own respect.
Look at me, you know, in the Pride and Prejudice, the Jane Austen novel, there’s a set of sisters and the one, the most unattractive of the sisters in more ways than one is Mary. And Mary, according to Jane Austen, according to the narrator and the writer, Mary is the most Christian looking, the most religious, of all the girls, and she’s always lecturing them on what is our Christian duty and why aren’t you reading your Bible more and why aren’t you being more moral. And this is what Jane Austen said about why she was so religious. It said, “Mary in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments of which she was impatient for display. It gave her a pedantic air in a conceited manner.” In other words, her religiosity was all about her. It was a way of saying, “See, I’m special. See, I’m a good person. In fact, I’m better than you.” It’s a gong, it’s a cymbal and here’s what’s so ironic. It’s basically another form of self-centeredness. Put it like this, giving your money away, is externally, publicly very sacrificial, suffering for your faith, you know, taking it on the chin for your faith is externally, publicly sacrificial. But what Paul is saying here is that you could be like that, you could be, you might say, volitionally, behaviorally, very, very sacrificial and unselfish in your behavior, but in your heart, impatient, unkind, envious, grumpy, crabby, selfish, irascible, manipulative. And, here’s the reason why.
Because, there’s a kind of morality that doesn’t put a stake through the heart of self-centeredness. It just nurtures it. It cultivates it, because everything you’re doing is for you, just like Mary was doing everything. It’s not for God. It’s not for your neighbor, you’re helping the poor, but not for the poor’s sake, for your sake. You’re going to worship and praising, not for God’s sake, but for your sake. You’re doing out of a sense of emptiness. And you’re trying to fill that emptiness with respect and trying to say, “God, now you have to favor me, and other people have to favor me, and I have to favor myself. Look, what a good person I am.” Just like gong, a cymbal. It’s hollow, externally selfish, internally, and anybody who lives with you can see it. That you’re grumpy, the irascible, that you’re selfish, that you’re manipulative, that you’re anxious, that you’re vain. And Paul says, that shows not a supernaturally changed heart. And basically, he’s showing that’s a morality that does not come from love. Well, you say, “Okay, you’ve been saying ‘Love, love, love.’ All right, what is love?” Well, it’s pretty simple. Self-centeredness says, “me-first;” love says, “you-first.” Self-centeredness says, “My needs are more important, so I’ll trample on yours to fulfill mine.” Love says, “Your needs are more important. So I’ll sacrifice mine to fulfill yours.” Simple as that.
If you have in your heart, a need to get God’s favor, to get other people’s favor, and I feel like I’ve got to do all these things in order to make sure that it comes in, you’re doing it for yourself. It’s me-first. It’s all about you. And that means that even if externally in order to be moral, to be thought of as moral, for you to think of yourself as moral, to present to God yourself as a moral and moral person, you’re going to be unselfish in these external big waves. But internally, you’re going to be just, everybody’s selfish, everybody’s proud, everybody’s unhappy, everybody’s irritable, everybody’s worried, everybody’s ungracious as everybody else, sexually. And that’s the reason why you should not be, let me tell you this, you should not be surprised when great people that you have so much respect for, suddenly seem to have some kind of moral collapse.
Like for example, it can be a public servant, a man or a woman who’s just served four years in public service, usually meaning government, maybe politics or civic leadership, in some way nonprofits. And whereas everybody else that they went to Harvard, Yale, Princeton with, is making far more money, they get lower salaries, and they’re just giving to everybody, and everybody has so much respect for them, or there’s people in ministry, “Oh, look at them. They’re preaching the word.” And then, suddenly you find out, “Oh, they embezzled, oh, they committed adultery. Oh, they did something they were, how could that happen?” I’ll tell you how it happens. If your morality is external, then you’ve actually not put a stake through the heart of your self-centeredness, but you’ve been nurturing it. See, you’ve been actually feeling better and better about yourself. You’re doing all this stuff so that you can feel good about yourself because, it pays, all your goodness pays. And yet, that means, you’ll grow in self-pity and that public servant will say, nobody knows how much I’ve sacrificed for this community. Nobody knows and so there’s opportunity to make a deal or cheat or make some money or have an affair you say, “I deserve it.”
See, external morality without a supernaturally changed heart is a house of cards. It’s just a house of cards because basically you look unselfish on the outside, but inside your every bit is grumpy, you’re competitive. You’re looking at other people, you’re envious. You’re boastful. You’re, you know, you’re self righteous in many ways. You’re self-absorbed, and that’s going to come back, and at some point it’s going to erupt. Morality without a supernaturally changed heart is a house of cards. So we’re in trouble, are we not? The real question is, how do you get a supernaturally changed heart? Don’t mistake active ministry for it. Don’t mistake moral goodness for it, moral discipline virtues for it. Well, what is it? Well, it’s love, and here’s what Paul’s doing. When he gets to verse 4–7, almost 8, you know, when he gets there, it looks like he’s describing love. Love is patient and kind, it doesn’t envy, it doesn’t boast. It’s not proud. It doesn’t dishonor it, that means it’s courteous. It’s not self-seeking. It’s not easily angered, it doesn’t keep grudges, it keeps no record of wrong. It does not delight in evil, rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres, love never fails. And the way this is usually read and the way this is usually preached frankly, is okay. It’s not enough just to be good. Verse 3, it’s not enough just to be active in the church, verse 2, got to be loving. And so you say, okay, there it is, I got to do those things and that’ll then be okay.
And that’s miss the whole point of the way in which Paul puts this. Paul doesn’t say, “Love consists of patience. He’s not actually describing an abstract principle at all here. He doesn’t say, “Well, if you want to be loving, you got to do these things.” He doesn’t say that. He said, “love is.” He personifies love. Love is patient. Especially when you get down, when it says, “love does not delight in evil.” Wait a minute, that is, talking to itself loves a person. Love protects, love trusts, love hopes. You say, “Well, what he really means is, if you are a loving person, you need to trust, if you are a loving person, you need to help,” Well, yeah, but if somebody says and one of the reasons why this is often read at weddings is because it has an elevated tone when you say, “love is patient,” if you want to love, that consists of being patient, if you want to love. So, it’s one thing to say love consists of forgiveness, another thing to say, love keeps no record of wrongs. That’s more poetic. It’s more lyrical, it’s more elevated. It’s one of the reasons why we read it at elevated events, like weddings.
But you’re, I think we’re missing the point Paul is making something, a very crucial point for us by depicting love as a person. And there’s two reasons I think he does it. And if you grasp this, you’re on your way. The first is, he depicts it as a person because that’s the only way love ever comes into your life. Nobody learns to love by trying. You only learn to love because someone picks you up and loves you. Love is an active force, not a passive set of principles or practices. Love is an act of force. No one learns to love by trying. You only learn to love because someone loves you, someone picks you up.
Now, by the way, one of the reasons why this is literally true, one of the reasons why orphanages in the west for infants have pretty much died out, you know, in other words, an infant and an orphanage, that’s firstly not there. Why? Because we know that even if you just keep the infant in the crib and pick the infant up to change him or her, or feed him or her, a third of them die. Half of them have mental problems as they grow up. What every baby needs is, to be constantly held, constantly cued over, constantly delighted and constantly kissed. Literally somebody has to pick you up and just hug you and love you, or you can’t love. You can forget all these other lists of things. Of course these things are helpful. I want to be a more loving person. Here’s a great list fine, but unless you’ve met love in the form of a person, you will never be able to be loving just by looking at a list.
Before love is something you do, it has to be someone you’ve met. Before love is something you do, it’s got to be someone you’ve met. And if you haven’t met someone who’s so filled the deepest part of your heart with love, the deepest part of your soul with love, so you are short of that love. When you move on, the world is so called do good things, you’re doing it to use people in order to fill that. Everything you do, even every good deed you do, every charitable thing you do, if it’s not coming from a fullness of love, where you’re just loving others as you’ve been loved, if instead you’re not sure of that, then everything you’re doing is actually for yourself as a way of just trying to steal love and respect from other people. And it’s all about you.
And that’s one of the reasons why Paul puts this in the form of love. Unless you’ve met someone who loves you to the skies, fills you with love, there’s all the lists matter. Ah, but here’s the question. Where do you get that? Now, of course, by the way, your parents, I hope in many of your cases, your parents were probably the very first persons to lift you up and, and love you. But here’s what Paul is saying. I don’t think Paul is wrong when he says love does not. Love always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres and never fails. Now, you could read that first about you. And you could say, “Oh, okay, it means that if I’m loving, I need to protect trust, hope, persevere. And if I ever fail to do that, then I’m failing to love.” Well, you could look at it that way. But actually, there’s another way to look at it. You need love like that. We are so dependent on love that we can’t bear to be loved by someone who will fail us, who will not persevere, who will not hope and where are you going to get that from? Your parents? Well, I want you to know, I’m a parent, I just, FYI, parents are flawed people, they will let you down. They will disappoint. They won’t always persevere, they won’t always hope. They won’t always trust. And even if they’re really good ones, they’re going to die. They’re going to lose. They’re going to leave you. They’re in that sense, their love will fail.
Well, you say, “I can do it to my spouse.” Well, spouses are made of the same human stuff as parents. “Oh, how about my children? I find it in my children.” Well, you just, you’ll just destroy them if you actually try to smother them with that kind of freight. Where are you going? But we need someone, we need a love that so always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres and never fails that it fills us up so that we’re able to move out in the world and fullness to love others rather than in emptiness in order to use them in order to get some kind of respect. Well, then, here’s the question. Who can give that kind of love?
And the second reason I think Paul personifies love is he has a person in mind. Because, the first word is love is patient, but the Greek word is makrothumei, which literally means love is long suffering. How could Paul write that without thinking of the one who said, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” The man who suffered for us patiently? Love does not keep a record of wrongs. How can he, Paul write that without thinking of the one who on the cross said, “Father, forgive them, they don’t know what they’re doing.” Love always hopes. How could Paul write that without remembering that? You know, here’s this thief dying on the cross. I mean, he’s being killed at the end of all of his hopes, right? He’s got no hope left. And this guy next to Him says, “Hey, I’m the Messiah, the Son of God, and today you will be with me in paradise.” Nobody else in the world can say that to you. Nobody. Everybody else says, “At death, my love fails, when I die love fails, when you die, my love fails, but Jesus doesn’t, or Love never fails. When Jesus Christ is on the cross, looking down at all of His friends who’ve either betrayed, denied or forsaken Him, and looking at everybody else around Him who’s supposed to be dying for there, but they’re jeering at Him, and they’re mocking at Him, and in the greatest act of love in the history of the world, He stayed. He didn’t fail us. He stayed until He said, It is finished, meaning I did it. I’ve accomplished it. I’ve saved them, I payed for their sins. He never fails,

    The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose,
    I will not, I will not desert to his foes;
    That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,
    I’ll never, no, never, no, never forsake!

He was forsaken on the cross, so that He can never, He’ll never forsake you. If you read verses 4–7, first not as something you must do, but a kind of love that saved you. If you read verses 4–8, first of all, as the love that saved you, that will humble you out of your self-centeredness, and it’ll affirm you out of your neediness and will so fill you that then you can reread this as a way to live.
And only then Christian friends, don’t mistake gifts for grace. And stop, look, all of us have partly changed heart. None of us have hearts. They’re anywhere near as changes we think they are. Look at this list and use it on yourself; ask the person in the world who knows you the best and say, “Am I more patient? Am I more kind? Am I less envious? Am I more happy? Am I less worried than I was two years ago? Because, if you have a supernaturally changed heart, you’re growing if you’re alive spiritually, and you’re becoming more and more like that, and if you say, “no, I’m stalled,” well, then wait a minute. Don’t settle for anything less than a supernaturally changed heart. And those of you who are thinking about Christianity, exploring it, please don’t think Christianity is all about just getting more moral. It is about meeting the one whose love will transform you and you will be born again.
Let’s pray: Thank you Father, I thank you for the Lord’s Supper because here we can have in our lives re-enacted what your Son did on the cross for us, perfectly patient love, absolute long suffering, love that persevered, love that never failed. We pray that you would re-ignite the same kind of love in our heart as we perceive and conceive and think about what you have done for us. In Jesus name we pray, Amen.