OUT OF EGYPT

Savior and Teacher—A Study of Matthew—February 19, 2012

Matthew 2:13–23

  13 When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. “Get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him.” 14 So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night and left for Egypt, 15 where he stayed until the death of Herod. And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
  16 When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. 17 Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled: 18 “A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her childrenand refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
  19 After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt 20 and said, “Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who were trying to take the child’s life are dead.” 21 So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
  22 But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee, 23 and he went and lived in a town called Nazareth. So was fulfilled what was said through the prophets, that he would be called a Nazarene.

  This is the Word of the Lord



Now every year in these weeks leading up to Easter, Christians around the world for centuries have pondered the life and death of Jesus. We’re doing that by looking at incidents in Jesus’ life through the book of Matthew. We’re taking texts each week from the book of Matthew. Last week, we looked at his birth. That’s when God became human. It’s called the incarnation.
This week, we look at a text that tells us another account out of Christ’s childhood, actually his infancy. It’s unique to the book of Matthew. It’s extremely well known, so well known that we didn’t even have to read the first part. The first 12 verses are very familiar. Wise men, sages, the magi from Eastern lands come to Jerusalem when Jesus is in infancy still in Bethlehem. They come, they go to Jerusalem, and they go before King Herod, the political king. They say, “We are looking for the Messiah, King of the Jews, who has been born, we believe.”
Herod is very disturbed. He gets his own scribes to say the Messiah is prophesied to be born in Bethlehem. Herod says, “Go to Bethlehem and find him. If you find him, tell me so I can come and worship him.” Herod, of course, wants to kill him. The wise men find Christ, but in verse 12, right before the passage you just heard read, God warns them in a dream not to go home to Herod. They go home another way.
Herod, realizing he has been tricked, slaughters all children under the age of 2 in Bethlehem, which would have been about 20 or 30 children, from what we know of the population of the time, but Joseph has been warned by God and goes to Egypt. There was a huge expatriate Jewish community in Alexandria, Egypt, actually, over 1 million. It was huge. Anybody who had political problems who was Jewish would go there.
When Herod dies, even though Joseph would like to go back to Judea, he is nervous about that because Herod the Great’s son is there. So he goes to Galilee and goes to Nazareth. So what? Why is this here? It’s important to remember that every one of the gospel writers, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, had an enormous amount of material to use, and they are very selective.
When they choose to tell us something out of the life of Jesus, it’s for two reasons. One is it happened, but two is it’s revealing. It reveals something about who Jesus really is and what he came to do and what his message and ministry was. So what does this account or this incident in the life of Jesus Christ tell us about Jesus himself? It tells us three things. He is the object of the hate, he is the agent of the grace, and he is the climax of the plan.


1. He is the object of the hate

It’s pretty obvious to see that Herod the Great, in his violent reaction, is hostile to Jesus Christ. This is not just a one-off incident. In the book of Luke, by the way, in the very beginning of Luke when Jesus is a child, Luke tells a completely different incident that gets across the same basic idea. It’s very clear that the gospel writers want us to know this.
Remember old Simeon sees Jesus in the temple when he is being brought by Mary and Joseph for circumcision? The Holy Spirit comes on him, and he gets a revelation. He says, “This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against … And a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
So even in the beginning of Luke, here’s the teaching: Christ evokes hostility. He evokes hatred. He is offensive. Now why would that be? For two reasons. These two go together. These two things put together are the reason why Jesus Christ, when rightly understood, who he is and what he is claiming, evokes such hostility.
First, the claims. Now you can see it. We didn’t read it. If you go to the beginning of chapter 2 of Matthew, this is what verse 1 says: “… Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, ‘Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews?’ […] When King Herod heard this he was disturbed.” Yes. Why was Herod disturbed? Because Herod is the king. So if you’re king and you want to stay king and you hear there’s a king coming, you get disturbed. That’s the principle.
If you think that claim about Jesus was enough to evoke hatred, later on as Jesus grows up and begins to make his own claims, they’re even more offensive. They bring about even more fury, because look at what he says. Jesus does not say, “Tell me your needs, and I will meet them,” nor does he even really say, “Give me your philosophical questions, and I will answer them.”
What he actually says is not, “I have the truth,” but, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. All truth resides in me.” He doesn’t just say, “I can show you the way to escape death or to get divine life.” He says,” I am the resurrection and the life. I can destroy death. I in myself have this kind of power.”
Jesus makes these astonishing claims, but basically what they are is claims of sovereignty over you and me. He doesn’t just claim to be King of the Jews; he claims to be King of every single human being on the face of the earth. Look at what he says. He says, “Unless you are willing to take up your cross and deny yourself, you cannot be my disciple. Unless you hate your father and mother, and even your own life, you cannot be my disciple.”
People say, “What in the world does that mean?” What it means is, “Your love for me and your allegiance for me should be greater than any other allegiance. You should be quite willing to die for me. You should be willing to pluck your eye out for me. Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not the things I say?’ ” He is claiming to have absolute, unconditional authority over you, and he is demanding absolute, unconditional allegiance to himself. Therefore, there’s the claim.
John Stott, very famously in his book, Basic Christianity, says, “Once you hear Jesus’ claims, you are forced to extremes.” This isn’t a direct quote, but Stott says something like, “No one who ever really understood what Jesus said did anything other than three things. There are only three possible responses. You either run away from him in fear, you attack him in anger, or you kneel and bow in complete surrender.” Terror, anger, or complete surrender. No other responses have any humanity to them. No other responses have any other intellectual integrity to them.
Yet every Christmas, you can go through stores and malls and things like that. While people are walking around blithely just listening to “Joy to the world, the Lord has come; let earth receive her King,” That got a bunch of children killed, because Herod understood it. People constantly tried to stone Jesus Christ because people understood what he was saying. People walk through the mall. “Let earth receive her King.” Don’t you understand what it means? No, because if you did, the natural enmity of the human heart against all claims of sovereignty over it would rise up.
Secondly, there is something in the human heart that resents those claims. Do you know what it is? Basically, put it this way. In every single person in this room, including me, in my heart and in your heart, there’s a little King Herod, because deep inside, you want to be the captain of your own fate. You want to be the captain of your own soul, the master of your own fate. Every human being wants that.
That’s the reason why the Bible says we’re not just indifferent to God. Romans 8:7 says, “The natural mind, the natural heart of human beings, is hatred toward God.” To the degree you understand what God asks, to the degree you understand who Jesus really is, you will see that hostility. It’s there. Now let’s apply point one. That is to say, what does that mean? If this is true (and it is), that rightly understood Jesus Christ’s claims bring about hostility, anger, and hatred when they come in contact with the human heart, then here are three practical implications.
First, you must have an extreme reaction to Jesus. Do you react extremely to Jesus Christ? In other words, where are you? Somebody out there is saying, “What are you saying? Are you saying you want me to be scared of Jesus or angry at Jesus?” Yes. Not as good as bowing the knee to Jesus, but way better than where almost everybody is.
The only way you can have a tepid response to Jesus, you can sort of like him or kind of believe in him or really wish you were a better Christian … If you play that, “I’m a Christian, but I really wish I was a better Christian,” or, “I really believe in him,” if you are in that gray zone which shows you’re not thinking and maybe you’re not feeling, it lacks humanity. It lacks intellectual integrity.
Please, I would rather you got off the dime and were afraid of him or angry at him because that’s closer to kneeling to him because at least you’re seeing what he says. If your response is not extreme, if it’s the tepid, if it’s in the middle, I urge you to come to grips with who he is by just starting to read the Gospels or reading good books that will guide you through the Gospels.
Secondly, you must take into consideration the residual hostility of your heart to God if you are a Christian. Now I know you know the great thing about being a Christian is you’re reconciled to God. Romans 5 says there is now peace between us. There was this hostility, but there’s peace. He has forgiven us, and we’re reconciled to him. You still have a heart that has residual anger and hostility to God. It’s still there. Not until we get to the very end and we’re glorified and we have our perfect bodies and our perfect souls … It’s still there.
You need to take that into consideration. Why do you think it’s so hard to pray? Why do you think it’s so hard just to concentrate on it? Why do you think he answers a prayer, you feel like, “I’ll never forget this, Lord. I’ll never forget this,” and just a week later you are forgetting it? How many times have you said, “I will never do this again,” and two weeks later you do it again? Why? Romans 7. Paul says, “… I do the very thing I hate.” There’s still a little King Herod inside you. Do you not know it?
So that means you really have to be way more intentional about Christian growth, about prayer, about accountability to other people to overcome your bad habits. You can’t just glide through Christianity. There’s still something in you. There’s still a King Herod, and you have to take that into consideration.
Thirdly, you must know you are not objective. If you don’t know what you believe about Christianity (I’ll take my life in my hands here because I’m in New York City), please don’t think you’re objective. You can’t be objective. Aldous Huxley later in his life was doing some sort of autobiographical stuff in a book called Ends and Means. He says something so intriguing. He basically says when he was in college, “I realize I didn’t want there to be a God. I wanted atheism to be true. I wanted life to be meaningless because then I could do whatever I wanted.” He admits it.
Thomas Nagel, philosopher, prominent down here at NYU, now retired I believe, in one of his books says something astoundingly honest. He says belief in God makes people nervous. It’s the fear of religion. “In speaking of the fear of religion, I don’t mean to refer to the entirely reasonable hostility [he has, by the way] toward established religion and religious institutions, in virtue of their objectionable moral doctrine, social policies, and political influence.” In other words, he says, “I don’t like church. I don’t like a lot of religion. I have a right to do …”
Then he says, “I am talking instead of something much deeper [in all of us]—namely, the fear of religion itself. I speak from experience, being strongly subject to this fear myself. I want atheism to be true, and I am made uneasy by the fact that some of the most intelligent and well-informed people I know are religious believers.
It isn’t just that I don’t believe in God and, naturally, hope that I’m right in my belief. It’s that I hope there is no God! I don’t want there to be a God; I don’t want the universe to be like that. My guess is that this cosmic authority problem is not … rare … I am curious … whether there is anyone who is genuinely indifferent as to whether there is a God.”
This cosmic authority problem is not rare. He knows the little King Herod in his own heart. He says, “Nobody is objective. How are you going to look objectively at the Bible when you know if it’s true, you lose control of your life? How could you be objective about that? You can’t be.” Don’t think you’re objective if you don’t believe in Christianity. Take that into consideration. Question your doubts.


2. He is the agent of grace

The second wonderful thing about this passage is Mary and Joseph and Jesus end up in Nazareth. It’s amazing. Did you notice … Look carefully. Even though Joseph and Mary were from Galilee, notice they try to go back to Judea. They want to go back to Jerusalem.
When Herod the Great dies in verse 21, “So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus [Herod’s son] was reigning in Judea in place of his father …” He went to Israel to Judea, but when he heard Herod’s son was there, he got nervous and “… was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he [went back] to Galilee and [settled in Nazareth where they were from].”
Now why was it that he was trying to go to Judea and he didn’t want to go to Nazareth or Galilee? The answer you can find in John 1, where Philip has met Jesus and is very impressed with him. He goes to his friend, Nathanael, and says to Nathanael, “Nathanael, I think we may have found the Messiah.” Nathanael says, “Where is he from?” Philip says, “From Nazareth.” Nathanael says, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?”
Now everybody in Judea look down their noses at Galileans because they were considered hicks from the sticks. So everybody in Judea looked down their noses at Galilee. That’s the reason Joseph wanted to go to Judea. He wanted to come up in the world. Well, of course, the Galileans felt very put upon. When you know there are people looking down at you, what are you going to do? Find somebody else to look down at.
So people inside Galilee, in parts of Galilee, looked down their noses at people who were not in other parts of Galilee. So people like Nathanael, who actually lived in Cana, looked down upon anyone from Nazareth. Now I have no idea why, but the point was Nazareth was the most backwoods, the most backwater, the most Nowhereville place of all. That’s how God works.
In this world, it’s pecking order, right? Ivies look down at the non-Ivies. That’s obvious. Certain businesses and people with certain sized bonuses look down at others. Did you see that article about the young woman who through a YouTube video now has a modeling career? Did you see that was in the New York Times this week? Front page article? You might say the powers in the fashion world look down at her. She has such obvious good looks. One person says, “She has the kind of face any woman could have if they really want it.” Nazareth. She is from Nazareth.
Do you remember that movie from the 80s, Wall Street, with Michael Douglas as the tycoon, Charlie Sheen as this young, upcoming analyst, and Daryl Hannah as the girlfriend of Michael Douglas? At one point, Charlie Sheen is looking at this piece of artwork on Michael Douglas’ wall. Daryl Hannah says, “It cost him $400,000.” Charlie Sheen says, “$400,000?” This was 1987 or something like that. “Wow. That’s enough to buy a beach house.” Daryl Hannah looks at him and says, “Sure, in Wildwood, New Jersey.” Nazareth.
Now the point is God does not operate like that, and nobody who has anything to do with God should operate like that. God’s approach to salvation is completely, utterly, absolutely the opposite. In ancient times, when the oldest son always got all the wealth and the second or younger sons got nothing, they had no social status, how does God work? Through Abel, not Cain. Through Isaac, not Ishmael. Through Jacob, not Esau. Through Ephraim, not Manasseh. Through David, not his older brothers.
At a time in which women who couldn’t have children were disgraced, God could have brought his saviors into the world, his deliverers into the world, through all kinds of women. He always chooses the woman who is unloved, the woman who is ashamed. He chooses old Sarah, not young Hagar. He chooses Leah, who Jacob doesn’t love, not Rachel. He chooses Rebecca, who can’t have children, Hannah, who can’t have children. Samson’s mother can’t have children. Elizabeth, John the Baptist’s mother, can’t have children.
Why? Over and over and over again, God says, “I will choose Nazareth, not Jerusalem. I will choose the girl nobody wants. I will choose the boy everybody has forgotten.” Why? Is it just that God likes underdogs? How moving. Isn’t that moving? No. He is telling us something about salvation itself.
Every other religion, every other moral philosophy … You’re going to see a whole lot of books now by agnostics and atheists saying, “Even if we don’t believe in God, we still need to have some way of bringing people together and giving them moral values and all that stuff.” Every philosophy, every religion is going to say, “Here’s how we can be saved,” however they define salvation. “Here’s how we can be saved. Summon up all of your strength, and live like this.”
Jesus Christ comes and says, “You’ll never do it. You’ll never do that. I have come not to show you how to summon up your strength so you can find God; I have come as God to find you. Therefore, I’m going to save you. I’m going to save you through what I do, not what you do. I’m going to save you by grace.”
This means all other religions appeal to the strong, the people who can pull it together, the people who can summon up the blood. Only in Christianity Jesus says, “I’ve come for the weak. I’ve come for those who admit they’re weak.” Therefore, it’s not nuts. That’s what Christmas is all about, you know.

  Seek not in courts or palaces;
  Nor royal curtains draw;
  But search the stable, see your God
  Extended on the straw.

Now how do we end and apply this point? Like this.
First, God works through the lowly, not the powerful. I don’t care who you are. I don’t care what you’ve done. I don’t care what your background is. I don’t care what deep, dark secrets are in your past. I don’t care what shameful things you may have ever done. In New York City, just to be mediocre is considered to be a failure. I don’t care how you feel.
God saves and works through anybodies and even nobodies rather than somebodies. What that means is there’s hope. It’s freeing. We’re all sinners saved by grace. It doesn’t matter who you are or what you’ve done. Jesus’ arms are open wide. He went to Nazareth to say that. There are a lot of other ways he says it.
Secondly, our worldly status should be left out of Christian community. We do live in New York City, and therefore, there are a lot of people of influence, a lot of smart people, a lot of talented people. We have to be very careful, really careful, because not only this text but all through the Bible, we’re being told race, pedigree, wealth, status … When you come in the doors and we come together, we come together in the Christian community in the church, we have to leave things outside as markers.
In here, it’s your identity in Christ, the fruit of the Spirit, and your service to him. You have to leave those things outside. They should not rule us. Those distinctions out in the world mean everything. Everything. That’s where all the hubris comes from, all the disdain, all the sarcasm … Wildwood, New Jersey. A face any woman could have. That has to be in every way left out of our community.


3. He is the climax of the plan

There is something that happens in this text that only the most diligent will discover. When Matthew goes through and he is telling about the story of Jesus, he constantly quotes the Old Testament. He does it twice in this passage. Up here in verse 14, he says Jesus and Joseph and Mary went to Egypt. Then they came out of Egypt after they were in Egypt in exile for a while. They came out back to Judea and to Galilee. “And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet: ‘Out of Egypt I called my son.’ ”
Of course, if you have a Bible, there will probably be a little superscript thing there and a footnote that says this is Hosea 11:1. Now some of you are the more fastidious types. You actually look up those passages. You say, “Oh really? Hosea 11:1.” You go to Hosea 11:1 to read it, right? Not many of you; just a few elite, super-spiritual, slightly uptight people who look up everything.
If you do that and you go there, you will be very confused because when you go back, you will see it’s not a prophecy at all. In fact, in the Old Testament, the Lord calls his people Israel corporately my son, just like he also sometimes calls them his bride. The metaphor is he is the Lord. He is the husband, and his people are his bride. He is the father, and the people are his son.
When you go back there, all Hosea is doing is he is talking about the exile and the deliverance from exile of Israel. Israel was in Egypt. Moses led them out to Canaan. That’s what it is talking about. Yet Matthew can look at something that happened to Israel and say, “It’s fulfilled in Christ.”
Now you say, “Well, that’s kind of high theology.” Well, it’s more than high theology. There are two ways to read the Bible. One is it’s a set of stories about what you must do, sort of a set of Aesop’s Fables, a set of stories that say, “Here’s Abraham. He was tested. He failed. Don’t fail like him,” or, “He came through. Come through like him.” It’s a set of Aesop’s Fables. If you read the Bible like that, it will crush you.
Mark Twain had a recurring nightmare in which he is lying in bed, and this huge Bible is on his chest pressing down and crushing and suffocating him. Anyone who reads the Bible has a set of stories you must emulate. Basically the Bible is about you, what you must do, how you have to live in order to have God bless you. It will crush you.
There is another way to do it. Yes, David fought Goliath. Good for him. Yes, Adam was thrown out of the garden. Bad for him. Yes, Abraham did some good things (good for him) and bad things (bad for him). So there are a bunch of stories, except when we get to the New Testament. If you start up to look up the references, you will see that the New Testament writers say Jesus Christ is the true Israel. He is the true Adam. He is the true Moses. He is the true David.
In other words, the Old Testament is not just a set of stories about how you ought to live; it’s a plan of salvation Jesus Christ fulfilled. He is the true Israel. That is to say he is the one person who did everything God asked Adam and Abraham and Moses and David and Israel to do, the Ten Commandments, the tabernacle, the sacrifices. He asked them to do all these things.
Nobody ever did them except Jesus Christ, who now is the ultimate sacrifice for sin when he died on the cross. He is the ultimate Prophet. He is the ultimate Priest. He is the ultimate King. He does everything we should have done for us so when we believe in him, we’re saved. He dies on the cross. He gets the curse we deserve. When we believe in him, we get the blessing he deserves.
Now some years ago, I was lecturing at a seminary trying to say, “Everything in the Bible is about Jesus.” In the end, you have to leave telling people not just, “Live like this,” but, “In Christ, you’ve been saved even though you can’t live like this. Now once you know, once you have that joy and gratitude and know God loves you, you actually have a new incentive to start trying to live like this.” Do you have that? Somebody said, “Explain it.” So this is what I read them.
“Jesus is the true and better Adam who passed the test in the garden [the garden of Gethsemane] and whose obedience is imputed to us. Jesus is the true and better Abel who, though innocently slain, has blood now that cries out for our acquittal, not our condemnation. Jesus is the true and better Abraham who answered the call of God to leave all the comfortable and familiar and go into the void ‘not knowing whither he went!’ to create a new people of God.
Jesus is the true and better Isaac who was not just offered up by his father on the mount but was truly sacrificed for us all. While God said to Abraham, ‘Now I know you love me because you did not withhold your son, your only son whom you love, from me,’ now we can say to God, ‘Now we know you love us, because you did not withhold your son, your only son, whom you love, from us.’
Jesus is the true and better Jacob who wrestled and took the blow of justice we deserved, so we, like Jacob, only receive the wounds of grace to wake us up and discipline us. Jesus is the true and better Joseph who, at the right hand of the king, forgives those who betrayed and sold him and uses his new power to save them.
Jesus is the true and better Moses who stands in the gap between the people and the Lord and who mediates a new covenant. Jesus is the true and better Job, the truly innocent sufferer, who then intercedes for and saves his stupid friends. Jesus is the true and better David, whose victory becomes his people’s victory, though they never lifted a stone to accomplish it themselves.
Jesus is the true and better Esther who didn’t just risk losing an earthly palace but lost the ultimate and heavenly one, who didn’t just risk his life, but gave his life to save his people. Jesus is the true and better Jonah who was cast out into the storm so that we could be brought in. Jesus is the true and better Rock of Moses who, struck with the rod of God’s justice, now gives us water in the desert.
He is … the real Passover Lamb—innocent, perfect, helpless, slain so the angel of death will pass over us. He is the true temple, the true prophet, the true priest, the true king, the true sacrifice, the Lamb, the Light, the Bread. The Bible is not about you—it is about him.” Let’s pray.

Our Father, we are so grateful that in spite of our hostility, your Son came and died for us to show us that salvation is by grace. He comes and he fulfills all of our obligations so we can rest in that. Now we pray that you would help us to work out the implications of that. Make us a community in which the world’s distinctions, pride, condescension, and prejudice are gone.

Help us also to give ourselves completely to you, absolute bowing-the-knee surrender. Forgive our tepidness. Forgive our lukewarmness. Make us hissingly hot in love with you and willing to live for you. Give us the joy that should come in the hearts of any people who know these things are true. We pray all this in Jesus’ name, amen.