SPIRITUAL WARFARE

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 29, 2012

Ephesians 6:10–13

  10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. 11 Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes. 12 For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms. 13 Therefore put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.

  This is the Word of the Lord



The Devil. Was that a little too big a change in …? I’m not sure that was a change in subject. We’re in Ephesians, and we’re getting to this week and next week a passage on spiritual warfare. In Africa, Latin America, Asia, most places in the world, the idea of spiritual warfare, of a conflict between spiritual good and spiritual evil, is not an unusual concept.
Many people in many parts of the world think it really helps them make sense of reality, but we here in the Western world find it a foreign concept, so let’s look at this passage. This is the first part. Next week we’ll look at another section on this. We struggle. Spiritual warfare. Let’s notice whom we fight (“Our struggle is not with flesh and blood but with spiritual forces of evil”), what we fight (the Devil’s schemes), and how we fight (“Do everything”).


1. Whom we fight

You see here in verse 12, “For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil …” When Paul says this and he says, “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood …” he doesn’t mean we don’t wrestle with any flesh and blood version of evil. He’s not saying evil doesn’t take flesh-and-blood form.
He has struggled with people who imprisoned him and who flogged him and who stoned him, so he certainly opposed flesh-and-blood evil. What he is saying is we wrestle not only with flesh-and-blood evil. When evil takes flesh-and-blood form, war and cruelty and violence and greed and strife and racism and crime and poverty, he is saying they participate in something that’s above and behind and beyond that is more than merely human and natural. The flesh and blood behind it is something that’s not flesh and blood.
Until you recognize that dimension of evil in the world, you will not be able to understand its depth and its pervasiveness and its intractability. That’s what he’s saying. Here in the modern Western world, we have trouble with that, because the modern Western mindset is everything has a natural cause. Therefore, everything has a scientific explanation. If everything has a natural cause and a scientific explanation, then crime and violence and greed and racism and war and cruelty must have a natural cause.
What is that natural cause then? We say it’s bad psychological factors, “You were not raised right. You weren’t educated right,” or bad sociological factors, bad social systems. We say, “There has to be a natural cause to all this. We can figure it out, and we can fix it.” That’s the Western mindset, but it’s wearing thin.
Andrew Delbanco, a great intellectual scholar type who’s at Columbia University, some years ago wrote a book called The Death of Satan. Even though he says in the book, “I’m a secular liberal,” he wrote a book called The Death of Satan, and the first line in the book is this. He says, “A gulf has opened up in our culture between the visibility of evil and the intellectual resources available for coping with it.”
Then he goes on and says something like, “We’ve jettisoned in the West the idea of cosmic evil or transcendent evil or supernatural evil. We don’t believe in that. In fact, we don’t even like to use the word evil, and the reason we don’t like it is because it implies value judgments and moral absolutes, so we use medical terms. We talk about dysfunction. We talk about pathology. We don’t use moral terminology.”
Delbanco essentially says, “As the twentieth century has gone on, it has gotten harder and harder to say holocausts and ethnic cleansing and serial killing are just bad psychological and sociological adjustment.” In his book, Delbanco turns to a very famous interaction. It’s in the book The Silence of the Lambs. Of course, it was also depicted in the movie, The Silence of the Lambs. It’s the place where the young policewoman, Officer Starling, goes to meet for the first time the monstrous serial killer, Hannibal Lecter.
She goes to the cell, and she’s looking at him and hearing what he has done and says, “What happened to him to make him so twisted? What happened to him that he could be so cruel?” He heard her. Big mistake, Starling. He begins to speak, and it’s very hard to read this without hearing Anthony Hopkins, I know.
She says, “What happened to him to make him so twisted?” Lecter responds, “Nothing happened to me, Officer Starling. I happened. You can’t reduce me to a set of influences. You’ve given up good and evil for behaviorism, Officer Starling. You have everyone in moral dignity pants. Nothing is ever anybody’s fault. Look at me. Can you stand to say I’m evil?”
Delbanco, who’s quoting this, says modern people, the modern West, cannot answer the monster’s question, and he’s right. He says, and I paraphrase, “As the twentieth century has gone on, what we said 100 or 150 years ago, that all evil has natural causes, scientific causes, psychological, social causes, is wearing thin.”
One of the things we used to say is racism and violence come from a lack of education, a lack of civilization, a lack of culture. It’s only primitive, uncivilized, uneducated people who are like that. Then we had World War II. Then we had the Final Solution and the Holocaust and the death camps that arose out of perhaps as educated and as cultured a nation as there was on the face of the earth.
Then we had Marxism, and Marxism says, “The reason for all the problem is not psychological or educational. It’s social. We have to put the means of production in the hands of the proletariat, not in the hands of the capitalists,” but they did. Of course, the proletariat was every bit as oppressive and violent as the capitalists were. Now Marxism has been thrown into the dustbin of history basically.
Over and over again, everything that says, “It’s psychological. It’s social,” Delbanco says we cannot today in the West account for the depth and pervasiveness of evil, but the Bible doesn’t have that problem. The Bible says here’s where evil came from. It came from the free will of two races of beings God created: angels and humans.
Some of the angels fell by exercising their free will and turning away from God. The fallen angels, the Devil and his demons, are personal, supernatural beings. On the other hand, we have the human race, and we turned. Now sin and evil are in our hearts. They are deep in our souls, which are still spiritual roots.
Therefore, here’s what Christianity says. “Yes, psychological and sociological factors can aggravate. They can accentuate and they can shape the innate self-centeredness, the innate self-absorption, the innate blindness and self-delusion, the innate radical insecurity in the human heart, but those factors don’t create it.” That stuff that’s in the heart, aggravated by the Devil, is what makes the world the way it is.
Let me just push this home to you. There is a Devil. There are demons. You need to see that. I know there have to be people listening to me or who will listen to this recording who have a lot of trouble with the idea that there’s a personal Devil or believing in a personal Devil, believing in what the Bible says. Let me suggest four things to you really quickly.
First, if you struggle believing in the Devil, would you please at least consider you’re being simplistic? New Yorkers want to be sophisticated. New Yorkers want to be nuanced and sophisticated, not crude and unsophisticated. Is it possible perhaps by not realizing the multi-dimensionality and the spiritual depth dimension to human evil, you are being simplistic and you are being naïve and not the people who believe in the demons, that they’re not being the unsophisticated, crude ones but you are?
Here’s a second point. If you struggle with believing in a person Devil, consider you might be culturally narrow, because white Western people have a lot of trouble believing in the Devil. That’s not true of most people in the world. Africa, Latin America, Asia have no trouble believing in spirits and demons and things like that.
They have wisdom too, don’t they? Are you really going to just look down at all that wisdom? Why not be open culturally to what other cultures tell you about this? To paraphrase Shakespeare, “There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in your psychologies and sociologies.”
Here’s a third idea you have to think of if you struggle with the idea that there’s a real, personal Devil. Do you believe in God? You say, “Oh, yeah, I believe in God.” If you believe in God, isn’t it a little inconsistent if you believe in good, personal, supernatural beings why there couldn’t be bad, personal, supernatural beings?
Here’s the main thing I want to say. If the Bible is true, if the Bible is right about this, and it is, then you will not be able to understand, let alone defeat, on your own the darkness in your own heart, in your family, in the city, in the world. It’s beyond you. We’re in over our heads unless God is helping us. It’s not going to just take psychology and sociology.


2. What we fight

What we fight is actually listed there. “… the devil’s schemes.” Let’s spend some time on this. The word schemes sometimes is called wiles. It’s a word that means … The Greek word is methodeia, method, but it’s a word that means strategies. The Devil, therefore, must have an arsenal of weapons, or the Devil must have a portfolio of various strategies he throws at us.
It’s very interesting. There’s a place in 2 Corinthians 2:11, that says, “Do not be unaware of the Devil’s devices.” “Do not be ignorant of his devices,” the old King James says. What is that? Obviously, the Devil has devices. We have to fight them. There are two errors we must fight that the Devil wants us to fall into and two sets of strategies we must fight that he throws.
A. The two errors. The two errors are actually inferred. You can infer them from the balance of what Paul is saying to us about the demons and the Devil. On the one hand, he doesn’t want us to overestimate. On the other hand, he doesn’t want us to underestimate their power. For example, he doesn’t want us to underestimate the power.
It says, “Our struggle is not against flesh and blood …” The word struggle there is not the normal word for struggle. It’s a word that actually means wrestling with your bare hands on the ground. If you’re shooting arrows at somebody, that’s a battle, and if you’re fighting them with a sword, that’s a battle, but when you get to the place where you’re on the ground, wrestling with your enemy with your bare hands, that’s the most desperate life-and-death, close moment, and that’s the word Paul deliberately chooses to talk about the spiritual warfare.
Look at the words he uses. Why doesn’t he just say demons? Instead he says, “… the rulers … the authorities … the powers of this dark world … spiritual forces of evil …” He’s trying to show us how formidable they are. He’s just racking up these impressive words. He’s trying to show us, “Do not underestimate them.”
On the other hand, he actually says, “Don’t overestimate them. Be strong in the Lord,” meaning, “Don’t be afraid. Don’t run. Don’t be cowardly.” Then he says at the end, “For when the evil day comes and you’ve put on the full armor of God and you’ve done everything I’m telling you to do, you will stand.” He doesn’t say you might stand. He says you will stand. Expect success.
Some of you have heard this. C.S. Lewis, in the introduction to his book, The Screwtape Letters, says there are two equal and opposite errors you can fall into with regard to demons and the demonic. What are those two opposite errors? They’re the ones Paul is trying to help us avoid. On the one hand, you can overestimate their strength. You can have what C.S. Lewis calls an unhealthy interest in them or ascribe all evil to them or ascribe too much power to them.
On the other hand, to disbelieve in them, to not believe in them at all … One you could call superstition. One you could call substition. One is overbelief. One is underbelief. Lewis ends his little quote by saying, “They themselves [the devils] are equally pleased by both errors and hail a materialist or a magician with the same delight.”
Why are both these errors bad? I’ll tell you why. Because they reduce evil, and the key to fighting successfully all the things that are against us, all the spiritual forces, is to actually have a nuanced and complexified understanding of evil. If you say, “Oh, everything is the Devil” or “There’s nothing the Devil,” you’ve reduced things, and you have a simplistic understanding of what goes wrong.
I often refer to this. I don’t know how often. If you’ve been around, you’ve heard me refer to it before. Some years ago I read a sermon by Richard Baxter who was a seventeenth-century, British Puritan minister in the 1600s. He wrote a book on melancholy, which, of course, is an old word for depression. He was a very good pastor, and he knew how to work with people.
This sermon says what are the possible causes of depression, melancholy? He named four. First, he says it could be your depression is caused by the physical. It might have a physical cause, in which case what you need is medicine or food or rest. It could be something to do with your body.
Secondly, he says there might be a psychological cause. You might be cast down in your temperament. What you need then is a lot of love and affirmation and just support. Thirdly, he says there might be a moral cause. You might feel guilty about something, or you might be angry at something and maybe feel guilty about being that angry and you need repentance and you need forgiveness and you need reconciliation.
Lastly, he says there could be a demonic cause, which we’re getting to here. Or, there could be more than one, and they could be kind of interactive. I challenge you to find anywhere hardly that level of nuance and balance, because almost everybody falls into one of the two errors C.S. Lewis talks about, one of the two errors Paul is trying to avoid.
On the one hand, let’s face it. You have a lot of Christians today who actually attribute so much to the Devil. If you have a problem, if you have a temper problem, if you have an anger problem, for example, it’s the Devil. We have to do something about it. Wait a minute. What about the way you were raised? What about the bad psychology in you because of a bad family background? What about your physiology? What about there’s something wrong with you chemically? “No, it’s all the Devil.”
Maybe you’re angry because you’re refusing to forgive somebody, and that’s a moral issue and not a demonic issue. On the one hand, you have believers, you have Christians, who are attributing too much. Weirdly enough, they would be upset to hear that, but they’re like magicians, according to Lewis. In other words, everything is magical. Everything is occult. Everything is demonic.
On the other hand, you have what we have mainly in New York, and that is we don’t believe in it at all. We give up on the whole thing. The whole idea is kind of silly. Both errors equally please the devils. They hail both with equal delight. Why? Because you’re really not able to see all they’re throwing at you, all life is throwing at you.
You can see most people, if you’re discouraged, depressed, there’s a super-spiritual approach. It’s all the Devil. There’s an under-spiritual approach. You just give a person medicine. It’s the psychological and the physical. It’s never the moral or the demonic. Oh my goodness, but Richard Baxter was biblical. Paul is being biblical. Are you being conformed to one of these errors? Stay out of those two errors. They are part of the method. They are part of his devices.
B. The two categories of lies. Do you know the word devil here? “Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes.” There are two words usually used to talk about the Devil. This is probably the most common one. It’s the Greek word diabolos, and you say, “Oh, yeah, I know that word. Diabolical,” but maybe you don’t. The word diabolos is the noun form of a verb, and the verb means to lie and slander.
You need to understand this. You need to get away from the error … We are too skeptical. That is, here in the West we don’t think the Devil is ever involved unless the person’s head is completely turning around, they’re turning green, and they’re vomiting. Then maybe that is the Devil, perhaps, because the Devil got in there somehow. The main way the Devil works is he’s a liar. The word devil means a liar. It also means a slanderer.
John White, a Christian counselor, wrote a book years ago and said here’s how the Devil works. Take a piano and open up the top and sing a note into it. Whatever string your voice is attuned to … Most of us don’t have perfect pitch, so we have no idea what note we’re actually singing, but you can find out. Open up the top of the piano, sing a note in, and a particular string will vibrate. It’s the string that’s attuned to your voice. You haven’t even touched it. You haven’t touched the key, and yet it’s vibrating to your voice.
That’s what the Devil does. The Devil cannot make a good person bad. The Devil makes a flawed person worse. The Devil plays on what’s already in you. He aggravates what’s already in you through lies. That’s the reason why, for example, it says in Ephesians 4, “Don’t let the sun go down on your anger. Don’t give the Devil that kind of foothold.” If you’re bitter, that gives him the ability to aggravate and press you and push you. You’ve given him a foothold.
It says in 1 Timothy, “Don’t put a young man into the eldership, because he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the snare of the Devil.” Pride helps you fall into the snare of the Devil. There are two ways in which Satan’s lies … He says things to you. It doesn’t necessarily mean he literally says things to you, that you actually hear a voice, “Who’s that?”
Rather, what he does is he stimulates talk that goes on in your heart, and there are two basic categories of those according to the Bible: temptation and accusation. By the way, from here to the end, you might get inspired, but I’m actually here to instruct and convict, so I want you to listen. I’m going to be as specific as I can in the next five minutes.
Temptation essentially gets you to have too high a view of yourself so you go and do things you shouldn’t. Accusation is the Devil’s way of trying to get you to have too low and self-hating a view of yourself so you’ll go and do things you shouldn’t. Both ways work. In temptation Satan is actually hiding God’s holiness from you and how much he hates sin. He hides that from you and plays up the love. In accusation he hides God’s love from you. He plays up God’s holiness and his wrath on sin, and he hides God’s love.
That’s the reason why John Newton, who was a very good pastor, was writing to a young man who was a Christian and who was very depressed and he was under accusation, because he was saying, “Oh, I’m so awful. God can’t love me.” John Newton knew he was under accusation, so he wrote, “You cannot be too aware of all your inward and inbred sins, but you may be, indeed you are, improperly affected by them.”
Here’s his main point. “You express not only a low opinion of yourself, which is right, but too low an opinion of the person, work, and promises of the Redeemer; which is certainly wrong.” You say, “How does this work exactly?” Temptations and accusations are basically lies, things Satan leads you to think in certain ways and moves you to do what’s wrong, one through too high a view of yourself, too low a view of yourself, too low a view of God’s holiness and too high a view of his love, too low a view of his love and too high a view of his holiness.
How do those lies work? If you get a book by Thomas Brooks, also a seventeenth-century Puritan, a contemporary of Richard Baxter, he wrote a book called Precious Remedies Against Satan’s Devices. He has 50 or 60 or 70, but what I have done is I’ve chosen just a few from the temptation category and just a few from the accusation category just to give you the sense of how this works.
For example, he says, “How does Satan tempt us?” Here are eight devices. I’ll give you the device, and then I’ll sometimes give you the self-talk you might be saying to yourself. The first device is he shows you the bait and hides the hook, which means he gets you to look at the short-term pleasures of what this would do and hide from yourself the long-term misery of what will happen. Come on. You know that one.
Here’s the second one, by getting you to rationalize sin as virtue. “I’m not really greedy. I’m just thrifty. I’m not really nosy. I’m just concerned. I’m not an alcoholic. I’m just sociable.” Thirdly, by showing you the sins of Christian leaders, so you say to yourself, “He did it too. Nobody is really that pure.”
Fourthly, by overstressing the mercy of God, so what you say to yourself is, “Do it. God will forgive you. That’s his job.” Fifthly, by making them bitter over suffering, so what you say is, “I’ve suffered. I deserve this.” By the way, do you want to know one of the reasons powerful, prominent men are always having these affairs? Because what they say to themselves is, “Nobody knows how hard I work and how many sacrifices I make, so I deserve this.” That’s temptation.
Here’s another one, by showing Christians how many bad people seem to be having great lives, and so the self-talk goes like, “I might as well do it. Playing by the rules doesn’t pay off.” I’ll just give you one more. The seventh one is by getting you to compare one part of your life to another. “Look, I’m very good over here. I do all that. It’s okay that I do that.” In fact, do you want an extreme form of that? Mafia hit men. “I’m good to my mother. Okay, I kill people, but I’m really, really good to my mother.” That’s not a joke, by the way.
What about accusation? Here are four from the accusation arsenal. How does Satan accuse us? By causing us to look more at our sin than at our Savior. By the way, all the parenting books will tell you if you give your child one compliment for every one criticism, if you give your child one criticism for every one compliment, that kid is going to grow up hating themselves. You need to give four or five compliments for every criticism, because the criticisms really lodge and the compliments don’t.
There are reasons for that. The biblical reasons for that are we know there’s something wrong with us, so you have to have a lot more compliments than criticisms. In the same way what Thomas Brooks says is for every one look at your sin, you need to take five looks at your Savior, and the Devil makes sure that doesn’t happen.
Secondly, by causing Christians to obsess over past sins that have done damage that can’t be undone. Thirdly, by making Christians think the troubles they’re going through must be punishment, so you say, “This wouldn’t have happened unless God was mad at me.” Fourthly, by making people think Christians couldn’t possibly have the inner struggles and feelings they have, so you say, “If I were a real Christian, I wouldn’t be having these thoughts and desires.”
Do recognize any of these? He’s playing you. He knows what strings you have, and he’s vibrating them. You must not be unaware of his schemes. You must understand what he’s out there doing. That’s what we’re fighting, the schemes of the Devil.


3. How we fight

You say, “Boy, you haven’t left much time.” No, I haven’t, and it’s partly because of the little bit of artificiality. We’ve broken the part of the text on spiritual warfare into two section. This section basically gives you the problem, and next week the full armor of God, what that is, brings you the solution.
I can tell you two things. The good thing about the fact that I don’t have that much time and most of this is next week is it forces me to be concise right here, and that’s helpful to everybody. I’d like to tell you two things you must do if you are going to fight successfully all these things that are being thrown at you.
The one is know what particular devices Satan uses on you. I will never forget the first time I read Thomas Brooks’ Precious Remedies Against Satan’s Devices. He has all of these devices, and basically, they’re forms of self-talk, little things you say to yourself in your heart on your way into doing something wrong.
I’ll never forget how surprised I was. I remember three of them were things I used to always say to myself, and they always led to disaster. I just finally got rid of them. I said I’ll never say that to myself anymore. When I start to think that, I say, “That’s a dead end. Forget that. Disaster will happen now.”
So I no longer go there, and I realized basically Satan has stopped trying those out because I had gotten wise to them. Then I found three more. He’s not stupid. He moves around. He says, “Okay, they got wise to me on those three. Fine. I won’t go there anymore.” Do you know which ones he’s using on you? Do you know which yours are? He knows what your strings are. Do you know what your strings are? Do you know where you give him openings?
The second principle is the gospel is the armor. Do you know why? Come on. Let’s do some theology here. What are the two things he does? Temptation and accusation. He either gives you an overblown sense of God’s holiness and minimizes his love so you hate yourself or he gives you an overblown sense of God’s love and plays down the holiness so you go do things you shouldn’t do and think everything is going to be okay and it’s a disaster.
He turns you into someone who either is crushed by a sense of your guilt or doesn’t have enough of sense of guilt at all. If you believe you’re saved by living a good life, if you believe what all the other religions say and that is basically, “I will find God. I will self-actualize. I will be saved if I do these things,” if you really believe through your efforts and through your achievements and through your performance you can save yourself, then you will either sometimes feel like a sinner, “Oh, I’ve failed,” or you sometimes feel loved and accepted because you feel like you’ve succeeded.
If you believe the gospel that Jesus Christ died for you on the cross as your substitute, that he took the penalty for your sins so when you believe in him all of your guilt is put on him and absorbed there and all of his righteousness and all of his record is brought to you so you’re loved and accepted in him, then that means every Christian walks around with those two facts in their mind at the same time.
“I am a sinner. In myself I am lost, and my sin was so great nothing less than the death of the Son of God could save me. My sin was so bad God had to do that. Jesus had to do that. On the other hand, I’m absolutely loved. I’m completely accepted. I’m as loved now as I will be 4 billion years from now. He sees me in Jesus Christ.”
Do you know what that is? One of those facts completely demolishes temptation. If you understand the gospel, you know the thing you’re tempted to do, Jesus Christ died so you wouldn’t do that. Jesus Christ was ripped from limb to limb because of this. How can you have anything to do with it?
On the other hand, when you’re being accused, the other fact completely demolishes that strategy of Satan, because you are absolutely loved and accepted. It’s the gospel. You put on the gospel, and it completely defeats the strategies of Satan. Let me just give you one example of the kind of talk you have to …
What it means to put on the gospel … If you’re accused, if you’re feeling too guilty, if you’re feeling like, “I’ll never be what I should be,” if you’re feeling like a failure, if you’re feeling God can’t love you, other people can’t love you, if you’re down on yourself, this is what Thomas Brooks said. I’ll close with this.
Thomas Brooks, who was a wonderful, wonderful pastor, said something like this to people who were under accusation. He said, “The remedy against this is to look upon all your sins as charged upon the account of Christ. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of us peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
You know the wife who said to the bill collector, ‘If I owe you anything, go to my husband.’ So may the believer say to justice or to the Devil, ‘If I owe you anything, go to my Christ who has underwritten me fully.’ I must not sit down discouraged under the fear of those debts which Christ to the uttermost farthing has fully satisfied. The remedy against this accusation is to solemnly consider believers must repent for their being discouraged by their sins.
It springs from the refusal of the richness, freeness, fullness, and everlastingness of God’s love and from the refusal of the power, glory, sufficiency, and efficacy of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ and from the refusal of the worth, glory, fullness, largeness, and completeness of the righteousness of Christ given to you by faith. God did not give a believer a new heart for it to be rent and torn in pieces by discouragement.”
What is that? That’s putting on the armor and now standing. Do you know how to put on the armor? Do you know how to handle the things that are being thrown at you? We wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with the gospel we can stand. Let us pray.

Our Father, we thank you for giving us everything we need to fight the fights that are in front of us. Lord, we know it’s not just the Devil. There’s evil in us. That’s the flesh. There’s evil outside of us. That’s the world. There’s evil above us. That’s the Devil. We know things are complex. We can never blame everything on the Devil. Oh my goodness, no, but we recognize the multidimensionality of sin. We recognize the spiritual dimension of it.

We will not make the same mistake our whole civilization has made for the last century of underestimating the power of evil and seeing we wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but in Jesus Christ you disarmed the principalities and power when you died on the cross. As the book of Revelation said, we triumph over the accuser with the blood of the Lamb.

We pray, Lord, that you would teach us how to do that. Everybody in this room needs to find the ways in which devices are being used against them and to use the gospel in the peculiar and particular ways they need to. Give them that wisdom, for we ask it through Jesus. In his name we pray, amen.