CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT

A Study of Ephesians: Who is the Church?—January 8, 2012

Ephesians 5:5–21

  5 For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure, or greedy person—such a man is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient. 7 Therefore do not be partners with them.
  8 For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light 9 (for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth) 10 and find out what pleases the Lord. 11 Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them. 12 For it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
  13 But everything exposed by the light becomes visible, for it is light that makes everything visible. 14 This is why it is said: “Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.” 15 Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, 16 making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil. 17 Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
  18 Do not get drunk on wine, which leads to debauchery. Instead, be filled with the Spirit. 19 Speak to one another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your heart to the Lord, 20 always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 21 Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.

  This is the Word of the Lord



We are continuing to move through the book of Ephesians. We started several months ago. We continue to go through it section by section. We have here a long passage on what it means to live the Christian life, because that’s actually what the second half of Ephesians is about. Let’s remind ourselves of the outline, the framework.
Ephesians 1–3, the first part of the letter, is about what happens to us when we receive Christ by faith … what we become, what we receive when we receive Christ by faith. But now, in chapters 4, 5, and 6, Paul moves on to say, “What does it mean to live the Christian life?” How do we live as Christians?”
That is the right order, because it’s not that we live in a certain way and, therefore, become Christians. It’s that we become Christians and, therefore, we live in a certain way. If by living in a certain way we become Christians, then we would be saving ourselves by what we do. But if we become Christians, and then, as a result, live in a certain way, that’s because we’re saved not by what we do but by what Christ has done.
So Paul has begun, in these three chapters, to lay groundwork for helping us understand what it means to live in accord with what we are. In Ephesians 4:17 there is an aside that shows how sweeping this is, because Paul says to his readers, “I do not want you to live as the Gentiles live.” But they were Gentiles.
In other words, what he’s saying is Christianity is not just a kind of a vitamin supplement. It doesn’t just come into your life and give you a little boost to live a better form of the kind of life you’re living. It’s a sweeping revolution that affects every part of your life.
In this passage, there are actually three extremely important keys to understanding what it means to live the Christian life. We’re going to move through the passage. The first key is the longest, verses 5–14, where it talks about living in obedience. In verses 15–17 it talks about living in wisdom. In verses 18–21 it talks about living in joy.
To be a Christian entails knowing sin and walking in obedience, knowing the time and walking in wisdom, and knowing the Lord and walking in joy. We’re going to take a commensurate amount of time matching the length of the points, so the first one will be longest, the second one will be the shortest, and the third one will be a little longer than that. Just a heads up.


1. Know sin and walk in obedience

The first part of the passage, from verses 5–14 … To live as a Christian you have to know sin (know what it is) and walk in obedience. In this whole passage, Paul is saying to live as Christians we must have a sense of the horror, of the evil, of the danger of sin.
He gets that across by saying there have to be four things you know about sin if you’re going to live a Christian life. The first one is in verse 11 where he defines sin. He says, “Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness …” That’s one way to understand sin. That means externally to disobey the law of God, to disobey the things God says in his Word he wants us to do.
There’s an example of it up in the very first verse: “For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure, or greedy person … has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.” There are actually two case studies there of disobedience. The first is immoral, impure (and the word immoral there is the Greek word porneia, from which we get our word pornography, and it’s a word that means sexual immorality).
The second case is greed. Why would Paul choose just those two examples of ways of disobeying the law of God? I think they get across the comprehensiveness of the law of God. There are many churches in this country that actually say what the Bible says about sex is obsolete, but what it says about greed, materialism, injustice, and oppression is absolutely right and should be heeded.
There are other churches in this country that put a lot of emphasis on denouncing sexual immorality and making a pretty big show of it but at the same time essentially ignoring what the Bible says about greed and the importance of involvement with the poor and not spending too much of your money on yourself.
In other words, the law of God is so comprehensive it’s very difficult for people of particular temperaments to hold it all together. We have a tendency to either nullify or ignore part of it and lift up other parts. The law of God, though, is very comprehensive. All those things are wrong. Sin is disobedience in your behavior to the law of God, but it’s not just a matter of external behavior. Sin also has to do with internal motive. Paul brings that out in the very same verse.
In verse 5, he says, “No immoral, impure, or greedy person—such a man is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of … God.” There Paul is talking about the fact that it’s possible to not be doing something externally wrong. That is, you may be doing a behavior that is externally in compliance with the law of God, but internally, for a motive that makes it sinful anyway, because idolatry is the first of the Ten Commandments: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.”
That means, in brief, God is saying, “If there’s anything more important to you than me, anything that gives you more meaning in life than I do, anything that is a greater foundation for your sense of value and worth and significance than me, if there’s anything you love more than me, if there’s anything you center your life on more than me, that’s a god. It’s a religion.”
Even if it’s a good thing, even if your children are more important than God, or your career is more important than God, or some very noble political or social cause is more important than God, it will eat you alive, because anything you put in the place of God will fail to give you what only the true God can give you. You’ll be driven into the ground by it. You’ll be paralyzed by fears if something goes wrong with it. You’ll be despondent.
Do you see how comprehensive the definition is? Paul says if you’re going to live as a Christian, you’re going to have to understand what sin is, and he gives us this comprehensive understanding of sin being external disobedience to the law of God, and internal idolatry. But he doesn’t stop there.
He also wants you to see the power of sin in the human heart, because he doesn’t just say in verse 11, “Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness …” He doesn’t just say that, because those are sinful behaviors and activities. He then says in verse 8, “For you were once darkness …” Here he’s talking about human nature, and he’s saying something I think most people today would say is just too strong.
He says human beings do not just do deeds of darkness. They don’t just do bad things. They are darkness in their inmost being. That’s human nature. They are darkness. Some people say, “Well, that’s too negative. That’s one of the things I don’t like about the Bible. It’s just too negative about human nature.” Really?
I will not forget it. I’ve been trying to find a clip of it on the Internet, but I can’t find it. Some years ago, Mike Wallace interviewed a concentration camp survivor named Yehiel Dinur. The reason he interviewed him was … Some of you know in the Nazi Holocaust (the slaughter of Jews in Nazi Germany) one of the architects of the Holocaust was a man named Adolph Eichmann. He disappeared right after World War II and went into hiding, but he was caught, and in 1961 he was put on public trial.
In the trial, eye-witness survivors who had seen him doing the things he did, who were still alive, were brought in to witness against him and to testify. Yehiel Dinur was one of them. When Yehiel Dinur went into the court room (and this was caught on film), when he saw Eichmann he started to sob uncontrollably, and he collapsed. The judge had to pound the gavel because there was great disorder in the court, and it was very, very dramatic.
Mike Wallace showed Yehiel Dinur the clip of how he just collapsed, and how he just melted down. He said to him, “What happened? What were you feeling at that point? Was it post-traumatic stress? Was it that you were just filled with rage to see this man?” Yehiel Dinur said something I just think absolutely startled and flummoxed Mike Wallace.
He essentially said, “When I walked in and I saw him, I suddenly realized he was no demon. He was no superman. He was an ordinary human being exactly like me, and suddenly I became terrified about myself. I saw that I am capable of the same things.” That’s why he collapsed. I think Mike Wallace was saying, “What?” He looked into his own heart and he saw darkness.
Hannah Arendt was covering the trial as a journalist and then wrote her well-known essay, “Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil,” was making the same point. She was saying what we want to do in order to defend ourselves is to say about the Nazis, “These must have been monsters. These must have been sub-people. They weren’t like us. They must have been monsters to be able to do that.” That way we can say we would never do that.
She says by saying they’re sub-people, that’s exactly what they did to the Jews. Oh, no. They’re just people, just like us, and we do not want to admit what we’re capable of, that the seeds in our hearts are there. If they were properly watered and properly fertilized, you could do all the same things they did. There’s a darkness in the middle of the human heart. Paul says Christians are not living in denial about that. Many other people are. If you’re going to live a Christian life, you’ve got to see not just the definition of sin but the power of sin in the human heart.
But thirdly, it’s not just that. If you’re going to live a Christian life, you also have to see the guilt of sin, because Paul does the no-no here, at least in New York (not that he ever was here, but even these words are very much a no-no in New York). In verse 6 he says, “Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things [meaning sin] God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient. Therefore do not be partners with them.”
We don’t like the idea of a wrathful God, partly because we misunderstand the term wrath there. We’re thinking of somebody who is losing his temper and can’t control his emotions, but the word wrath in the Bible (in fact, the word wrath in ancient literature) is talking about subtle judicial condemnation. God’s wrath lies on sin because sin deserves punishment. That’s the idea, because sin incurs guilt, and if you sin you are guilty. You’re not just messed up. You’re guilty, and it deserves punishment. That’s what it means to say God’s wrath is upon all sin.
People really push back on this a lot. I’ve talked to people over the years who’ve said something like, “You know, the Bible’s teaching on this just doesn’t make sense to me.” I’ve had people say to me, “There are some people who deserve God’s wrath. There are nasty people. There are bad people out there, the Nazis, the Holocaust, you know, and they deserve God’s wrath. But most people are good people. I’m a good person. I’m not religious, but I’m a good person, and isn’t that what’s important?”
Think about this illustration. Imagine an old widowed woman who has one child. As she raises him she teaches him to always tell the truth, always work hard, and always care for the poor. Honesty, industry, and charity. She teaches him how she wants him to live, and he listens to her. Then, when he comes of age, she is a very poor woman, but she scrapes together her meager savings and what income she can, and she puts him through college, and he graduates.
Now imagine that after he graduates he never talks to her again. He sends her a Christmas card, but he doesn’t answer her e-mails. He doesn’t answer her phone calls. He doesn’t answer her letters. He doesn’t talk to her, but he’s good. He does everything she wants. He tells the truth, he works hard, and he cares for the poor. He says, “Hey, I’m doing what she wants. Isn’t that good enough?”
What would you say to him if you knew him? You’d say, “No! It is not acceptable simply to live a good life and ignore a relationship with the one person to whom you owe everything.” Now, if there is a God, and you say, “Well, I’m not religious, but I’m living a good life. Isn’t that what’s important?” the answer is no.
It’s condemnable. It’s as culpable as that young man would be. If there is a God to whom you owe everything, then just to live a good life in general and not live for God, and not make your relationship with him the central thing because you owe him everything, means you’re guilty. It’s condemnable, and a Christian understands that.
Here’s what’s so interesting. There are four things Paul tells you about sin. Christians cannot live an appropriate life if, first, they don’t understand the definition of it and how comprehensive it is, second, they don’t understand the power of it still in human nature, and third, they don’t understand the guilt of it.
Lastly, go back to verse 8 and look at what he says, “For you were once darkness …” He’s talking to Christians. “… but now you are light in the Lord.” You are light! What’s that metaphor mean? It’s not that hard to tell. What does the word light mean in the Bible? Paul actually tells you in the next verse it represents goodness, righteousness, and truthfulness.
What in the world, after everything he’s just said? How could any Christian, knowing all the other things Paul just talked to them about, say, “Look at me. Look at all my goodness. Look at all my truthfulness. Am I not so brilliant and beautiful in my moral excellence that you need to almost wear sunglasses to look at me?” Why would any Christian say, “I am light”?
The answer is you can say it if you’re careful about the prepositional phrase. It means everything. It links us back to the first part of the book of Ephesians. It says, “… you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord.” And in the first part of Ephesians, God says the moment you receive Christ, the moment you believe in him as your Savior, you are united to him. You are put in him.
In a sense, you’re put in him so although in yourself you are still darkness and you’re still flawed, in Christ God sees you as brilliant, as beautiful, as acceptable, as goodness and righteousness and truth. Isn’t that astounding? You say, “How can that be?” Well, that’s what we were spending a lot of time on in the first part of the series.
One more thing. Imagine a girl, and she’s poor and she’s plain. She doesn’t have a penny, and she’s not very attractive. But the great prince falls in love with her, and he puts his love upon her, and he takes her to be his wife. In the great wedding ceremony he brings her to himself and makes a vow, and do you know what happens in that ceremony?
They’re united. Do you know what that means? The minute before they are united legally by a vow, she’s poor, and immediately, she’s rich. She’s got money. She’s got money to burn. Not only that, he has decked her in the most beautiful jewels and the finest garments in the world that money can buy. Though in herself she’s plain, she’s a vision of loveliness.
You see, in herself she’s poor and she’s plain. But in the love of her prince, she’s light. She’s beautiful. She’s wealthy. That’s just a dim hint of what it means to be a Christian. Paul says you have to keep these things all in balance. I told you, of the three points, this is the long one, but I want you to see why it’s long and why it’s so important.
If you live a life only filled with guilt (“I’m so dark, I’m so awful, I have all this bad stuff in my life and I’m a mess, and everything I do makes me guilty”) you’re not going to live the Christian life you should. Weirdly enough, if you hate yourself, if you go around feeling self-loathing, you will not live an obedient life. You’ll just give in to temptation.
On the other hand, if you say, “Well, I’m fine. I’m accepted. God has forgiven me, so it really doesn’t matter how I live,” no! This whole passage is Paul saying, “Sin, avoid it. Flee it! Have nothing to do with it. It’s awful. Expose it! Call it what it is.” There’s a balance here of knowing you’re light in the Lord, and because you’re light in the Lord you want nothing to do with sin.
The balance perfectly comes out in one sentence in our Westminster Confession, which is the Presbyterians’ historic summary of what they believe the Bible teaches. In the Westminster Confession 15, part 4, is one sentence that says, “As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation; so there is no sin so great, that it can bring damnation upon those who truly repent.”
Sin is that bad and terrible, and grace is that free and available. Just as there is no sin so small but it deserves damnation (condemnation), so there is no sin so great it can bring condemnation on those who truly repent. If you live your life in the light of those two balancing truths, you will have an incentive to live in a godly way. You will be able to pick yourself up when you fail without destroying yourself and hating yourself for 10 years. You will, by knowing sin, walk in obedience.


2. Know the time and walk in wisdom

Briefly (because it’s brief), in verses 15, 16, and 17, Paul adds something that’s so important. There he’s evoking everything the Bible, and the Old Testament particularly, says about wisdom. He says, “Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, making the most of every opportunity … do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.”
It’s really brief, and frankly, I think most people who are reading this in English go right by it and hardly notice it, but it is a point all by itself. It’s saying living the Christian life is not just a matter of obeying the moral rules. God has given you a lot of them. We just talked about how comprehensive they are.
It’s also knowing the right way to live in the 80 percent of life situations to which the moral rules don’t apply. For example, here are two jobs. One job is a job in which a product is being produced based on slave labor in Madagascar. The other job is just a conventional job without any ethical challenges or anything like that (retail at some place, or something).
One of these jobs, according to the moral law of God, you can’t take. You cannot participate in the exploitation of slave labor in Africa. You can’t do that. Over here, there’s really no ethical reason you can’t take that job. You may say, “See, that’s how I can decide. I use the law of God to decide right or wrong.”
But you all know most jobs are morally permissible. There are all kinds of people you could marry, and none of them are ruled out by the law of God. There are all kinds of jobs you could take, and none of them are ruled out by the law of God. There are all kinds of choices you could make. You have all these options, and none of them are ruled out, yet some of them are wise and some of them are stupid. That’s what Paul is saying.
Being wise is not less than being moral, because he says in the second verse, “… do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.” The Lord’s will is always Scripture, what the Bible says. But the first part says, “Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise, making the most of every opportunity …”
I’ll just take a second to unpack that a bit. How can you make some decisions when the law of God doesn’t directly say this is right or this is wrong? How do you decide which thing is the wise thing to do? First of all, literally, the word Paul uses there is not live, but walk. He literally says, “Look carefully at how you’re walking.”
The reason the English translators translate it as live is because in the Bible, walking is a metaphor for life. When it says walk with the Lord, it means live for the Lord. When it says walk in this way, it means live in this way. Okay, that’s fine, and yet the metaphor of thinking of living as a walk is actually helpful. Why? Because when you walk, you’re going somewhere. There’s always a direction.
Let’s just say you’re making a lot of money, or you’re trying to make a lot of money. Is there anything wrong with that? No. Look at Job. Look at Abraham. That’s fine. But for what purpose? What are you making your money for? What are you doing your job for? You’re trying to get up the career ladder. Fine. What are you trying to go up the career ladder for? What is your real purpose? What are the motives of your heart?
Is it to gain power? Is it to gain approval so people will like you? Is it to gain control over your environment because you feel like, “That’s how I get my security”? Or is it to serve God? Or is it to serve the people around you? You see, there’s nothing wrong with the activity, but be careful how you walk.
Look at the motives of your heart. Find out what you’re doing it for, because that will determine the impact of that activity on your soul and on the souls and the lives of the people around you. If you don’t do due diligence to try to find out what your motives are, and if you don’t expect a great amount of self-deception on your way to finding out where your heart really is, then you’re a fool. That’s what he’s saying. Do you know how to do that?
Then the second part of the passage, verse 16, says, “… making the most of every opportunity …” Literally, Paul says there redeeming the time. What he means is if you know your heart, and you know the Word of God, then when you see the options in front of you, which is the most strategic? Which is the best use of your time? Which one will bring the most good? Which is the best for you and your gifts? Which is the best for the people around you?
If you have too high a view of your own abilities, or too low a view of your own abilities, you’re going to make foolish decisions. Wisdom is a matter of understanding human nature. If you’re always disillusioned and amazed people are doing this to you, then you don’t understand human nature, and you’re going to make foolish decisions. This is an extremely important part of what it means to be a Christian.
Do not think being a Christian is a nice mechanical thing where you get the rule book and you follow it. You do have to follow the rule book, but you’ll find the rule book doesn’t apply to all kinds of things you have to do in life. Therefore, the growth and wisdom that comes from knowing the Word of God, knowing your own motives, knowing human nature, and knowing times and seasons, so you can redeem the time and make strategic decisions, is a critical part of being a Christian.


3. Know the Lord and walk with joy

The last section is very well known. It’s verses 18–21. It’s what it means to be filled with the Spirit. We’ve often in our teaching ministry at Redeemer looked at this whole passage at length. I’m not going to do that right now. That’s one of the reasons I tacked it on here. I want you to see how it fits in the whole context.
August 10, 2010 (not that long ago), I preached a whole sermon on this passage. There are other ones too, so there is no reason for us to break it all down. Here’s the bottom line, or maybe I should say here’s the big picture. At the heart of what it means to live the Christian life is joy. “Do not get drunk on wine … Instead, be filled with the Spirit.”
Why would Paul contrast those two things? Only for this reason. He’s saying being filled with the Spirit is to get the thing people get drunk to get. He’s saying you don’t have to get drunk to get the joy, the roaring joy the Spirit gives. Besides that, we all know, I guess, alcohol makes you happy because it’s a depressant. That doesn’t mean it makes you depressed. It means it’s a chemical that depresses part of the brain.
You know, you get in trouble so you get drunk. Why do you feel happier? Because your brain is less aware of your problems. The Spirit operates on the exact opposite principle. The Spirit does not make you less aware of your problems. It makes you more aware of your resources. The Spirit takes the work of Jesus Christ. It takes the person of Christ, the work of Christ, what he’s done, and what you might know with your head, and makes it so real to your heart that you begin to say, “So, what were the problems?”
In other words, the reason we fail to be obedient, and the reason we tend to make foolish choices in life, is because we’re not happy enough in Christ. Why do you make stupid decisions? So often it’s because you’re so empty and unhappy inside that you make stupid decisions. Why do you disobey? Why do you give in to temptation? Why do you blow up and then wish you hadn’t blown up? Why do you do these things and say, “Why did I do that?” Because you weren’t happy enough to be obedient.
I know it sounds strange to hear a Presbyterian say this. There has to be a fountain of joy in the middle of your life. It comes because the Spirit fills you. That doesn’t mean so much you get more of the Spirit. The trouble with this metaphor filled with the Spirit is it sounds like you only have a pint of the Spirit. You need two pints.
But actually, if I had the time to show you what the grammar and the language means, it means to be dominated by what the Spirit thinks and does. What does the Spirit do? Jesus tells you in his Upper Room Discourse in John 16. He says when the Comforter comes (that’s the Holy Spirit), when the Counselor comes, when the Advocate comes, when the Holy Spirit comes, “he will glorify me.”
I know Jesus Christ was the only obedient person who ever lived, but then he died on the cross to take the curse from my disobedience. When I am moved by that and amazed by that, it makes me want to be obedient. I see Jesus Christ living a wise life, and not a foolish life. I see his consummate wisdom on the cross, where somehow, beyond what anybody else would ever have been able to come up with (and only God in his divine wisdom was able to do it), the law of God and the love of God were both fulfilled at once.
On the cross, the law of God was satisfied, and that way he doesn’t have to punish us, but if the love of God was satisfied, now he can save us, and now we can be a light in the Lord. To the degree the Holy Spirit takes those things you might know with your head and captures your heart with them, you will be happy enough to be obedient and wise.
It’s making Jesus as glorious as he really is in your eyes. It dominates you. That’s what it means to be filled with the Spirit. And if you are filled with the Spirit, what happens? You go around always singing in your heart. Isn’t that an amazing thing? Paul says the mark that you’re filled with the Spirit is you live a life of gratitude toward God, you live a life of service to other people (verses 20–21), but you walk around inside your heart always making music. You don’t just walk around thinking about God. You walk around singing. There’s an internal music.
Jonathan Edwards wrote his future wife, Sarah Pierpont, a love letter when he was 20 and she was almost 14. You can read this whole letter. It’s not very long. I’m only going to read you the beginning and the end. It was a mash note, we used to call it. It was a love letter to her. You can find it online.
I realized the other day what he was actually doing was seeing the fullness of the Spirit, exactly as Paul describes it, in this young woman, and he was falling in love with it. This is what he says; the beginning and the end. By the way, this was written in the 1720s, or something like that.
He says, “They say there is a young lady in New Haven who is beloved of that almighty Being, who made and rules the world, and that there are certain seasons in which this great Being, in some way or other invisible, comes to her and fills her mind with exceeding sweet delight, and that she hardly cares for anything, except to meditate on Him. She will sometimes go about, singing sweetly, from place to place, and seems to be always full of joy and pleasure, and no one knows for what. She loves to be alone, and to wander in the fields and on the mountains, and seems to have someone invisible always conversing with her.”
Don’t you want a life like that? Who knows? Maybe Jonathan Edwards was exaggerating. Maybe he was infatuated, and she wasn’t anywhere near as happy in Christ as this. Maybe she was like that, and maybe she wasn’t, but Paul says you can be like that. You may not be a Christian, or you may be a Christian and not living anything like this. All I can say to you is, “Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.” Let’s pray.

Our Father, we thank you for this kind of helicopter ride over this passage in which we see how much there is involved with living a Christian life. How revolutionary it would be if we understood sin, understood wisdom, and knew the joy the Spirit can give us so we are also walking about always sweetly singing to ourselves, full of joy, and no one knowing quite for what, always having somebody invisible conversing with us.

Oh Lord, we really do long for that kind of joyful life, and we ask that you would make it more a reality in our lives as we take up the bread and the cup, for there you so often meet with your people over your table. We pray this in Jesus’ name, amen.